F00-F09
Organic, including symptomatic, mental disorders

Overview of this block

F00 Dementia in Alzheimer's disease
     F00.0 Dementia in Alzheimer's disease with early onset
     F00.1 Dementia in Alzheimer's disease with late onset
     F00.2 Dementia in Alzheimer's disease, atypical or mixed type
     F00.9 Dementia in Alzheimer's disease, unspecified

F01 Vascular dementia
     F01.0 Vascular dementia of acute onset
     F01.1 Multi-infarct dementia
     F01.2 Subcortical vascular dementia
     F01.3 Mixed cortical and subcortical vascular dementia
     F01.8 Other vascular dementia
     F01.9 Vascular dementia, unspecified

F02 Dementia in other diseases classified elsewhere
     F02.0 Dementia in Pick's disease
     F02.1 Dementia in Creutzfeldt - Jakob disease
     F02.2 Dementia in Huntington's disease
     F02.3 Dementia in Parkinson's disease
     F02.4 Dementia in human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease
     F02.8 Dementia in other specified diseases classified elsewhere

F03 Unspecified dementia

A fifth character may be used to specifiy dementia in F00-F03, as follows:
           .xO Without additional symptoms
           .xl Other symptoms, predominantly delusional
           .x2 Other symptoms, predominantly hallucinatory
           .x3 Other symptoms, predominantly depressive
           ,x4 Other mixed symptoms

F04 Organic amnesic syndrome, not induced by alcohol and other psycho-
     active substances


 42


                                F00-F09 ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS

F05 Delirium, not induced by alcohol and other psychoactive substances
    F05.0 Delirium, not superimposed on dementia, so described
    F05.1 Delirium, superimposed on dementia
    F05.8 Other delirium
    F05.9 Delirium, unspecified

F06 Other mental disorders due to brain damage and dysfunction and to
    physical disease
    F06.0 Organic hallucinosis
    F06.1 Organic catatonic disorder
    F06.2 Organic delusional [schizophrenia-like] disorder
    F06.3 Organic mood [affective] disorders
         .30 Organic manic disorder
         .31 Organic bipolar affective disorder
         .32 Organic depressive disorder
         .33 Organic mixed affective disorder
    F06.4 Organic anxiety disorder
    F06.5 Organic dissociative disorder
    F06.6 Organic emotionally labile [asthenic] disorder
    F06.7 Mild cognitive disorder
    F06.8 Other specified mental disorders due to brain damage and
         dysfunction and to physical disease
    F06.9 Unspecified mental disorder due to brain damage and dysfunction
         and to physical disease

F07 Personality and behavioural disorders due to brain disease, damage and
    dysfunction
    F07.0 Organic personality disorder
    F07.1 Postencephalitic syndrome
    F07.2 Postconcussional syndrome
    F07.8 Other organic personality and behavioural disorders due to brain
         disease, damage and dysfunction
    F07.9 Unspecified organic personality and behavioural disorders due to
         brain disease, damage and dysfunction

F09 Unspecified organic or symptomatic mental disorder


                                                            43


MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS

Introduction

This block comprises a range of mental disorders grouped together on the
basis of their common, demonstrable etiology in cerebral disease, brain injury,
or other insult leading to cerebral dysfunction. The dysfunction may be primary,
as in diseases, injuries, and insults that affect the brain directly or with predilec-
tion; or secondary, as in systemic diseases and disorders that attack the brain
only as one of the multiple organs or systems of the body involved. Alcohol-
and drug-caused brain disorders, though logically belonging to this group,
are classified under F10-F19 because of practical advantages in keeping all
disorders due to psychoactive substance use in a single block.

Although the spectrum of psychopathological manifestations of the conditions
included here is broad, the essential features of the disorders form two main
clusters. On the one hand, there are syndromes in which the invariable and
most prominent features are either disturbances of cognitive functions, such
as memory, intellect, and learning, or disturbances of the sensorium, such
as disorders of consciousness and attention. On the other hand, there are
syndromes of which the most conspicuous manifestations are in the areas
of perception (hallucinations), thought contents (delusions), or mood and
emotion (depression, elation, anxiety), or in the overall pattern of personality
and behaviour, while cognitive or sensory dysfunction is minimal or difficult
to ascerta in. The latter group of disorders has less secure footing in this block
than the former because it contains many disorders that are symptomatically
similar to conditions classified in other blocks (F20 - F29, F30 - F39, F40 - F49,
F60 - F69) and are known to occur without gross cerebral pathological change
or dysfunction. However, the growing evidence that a variety of cerebral and
systemic diseases are causally related to the occurrence of such syndromes pro-
vides sufficient justification for their inclusion here in a clinically oriented
classification.

The majority of the disorders in this block can, at least theoretically, have
their onset at any age, except perhaps early childhood. In practice, most tend
to start in adult life or old age. While some of these disorders are seemingly
irreversible and progressive, others are transient or respond to currently available
treatments.

Use of the term "organic" does not imply that conditions elsewhere in this
classification are "nonorganic" in the sense of having no cerebral substrate.
In the present context, the term "organic" means simply that the syndrome
so classified can be attributed to an independently diagnosable cerebral or

44


                                F00-F09 ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS

systemic disease or disorder. The term "symptomatic" is used for those organic
mental disorders in which cerebral involvement is secondary to a systemic
extracerebral disease or disorder.

It follows from the foregoing that, in the majority of cases, the recording
of a diagnosis of any one of the disorders in this block will require the use
of two codes: one for the psychopathological syndrome and another for the
underlying disorder. The etiological code should be selected from the relevant
chapter of the overall ICD-10 classification.

Dementia

A general description of dementia is given here, to indicate the minimum
requirement for the diagnosis of dementia of any type, and is followed by
the criteria that govern the diagnosis of more specific types.

Dementia is a syndrome due to disease of the brain, usually of a chronic or
progressive nature, in which there is disturbance of multiple higher cortical
functions, including memory, thinking, orientation, comprehension, cal-
culation, learning capacity, language, and judgement. Consciousness is not
clouded. Impairments of cognitive function are commonly accompanied,
and occasionally preceded, by deterioration in emotional control, social
behaviour, or motivation. This syndrome occurs in Alzheimer's disease, in
cerebrovascular disease, and in other conditions primarily or secondarily
affecting the brain.

In assessing the presence or absence of a dementia, special care should be
taken to avoid false-positive identification: motivational or emotional factors,
particularly depression, in addition to motor slowness and general physical
frailty, rather than loss of intellectual capacity, may account for failure to
perform.

Dementia produces an appreciable decline in intellectual functioning, and usually
some interference with personal activities of daily living, such as washing, dress-
ing, eating, personal hygiene, excretory and toilet activities. How such a decline
manifests itself will depend largely on the social and cultural setting in which
the patient lives. Changes in role performance, such as lowered ability to keep
or find a job, should not be used as criteria of dementia because of the large
cross-cultural differences that exist in what is appropriate, and because there
may be frequent, externally imposed changes in the availability of work within
a particular culture.

                                                            45


MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS

If depressive symptoms are present but the criteria for depressive episode
(F32.0-F32.3) are not fulfilled, they can be recorded by means of a fifth
character. The presence of hallucinations or delusions may be treated similarly.

.xO Without additional symptoms
,x\ Other symptoms, predominantly delusional
.x2 Other symptoms, predominantly hallucinatory
.x3 Other symptoms, predominantly depressive
.x4 Other mixed symptoms

Diagnostic guidelines
The primary requirement for diagnosis is evidence of a decline in both memory
and thinking which is sufficient to impair personal activities of daily living,
as described above. The impairment of memory typically affects the registra-
tion, storage, and retrieval of new information, but previously learned and
familiar material may also be lost, particularly in the later stages. Dementia
is more than dysmnesia: there is also impairment of thinking and of reasoning
capacity, and a reduction in the flow of ideas. The processing of incoming
information is impaired, in that the individual finds it increasingly difficult
to attend to more than one stimulus at a time, such as taking part in a conver-
sation with several persons, and to shift the focus of attention from one topic
to another. If dementia is the sole diagnosis, evidence of clear consciousness
is required. However, a double diagnosis of delirium superimposed upon
dementia is common (F05.1). The above symptoms and impairments should
have been evident for at least 6 months for a confident clinical diagnosis of
dementia to be made.

Differential diagnosis. Consider: a depressive disorder (F30-F39), which
may exhibit many of the features of an early dementia, especially memory
impairment, slowed thinking, and lack of spontaneity; delirium (F05); mild
or moderate mental retardation (F70-F71); states of subnormal cognitive
functioning attributable to a severely impoverished social environment and
limited education; iatrogenic mental disorders due to medication (F06.-).

Dementia may follow any other organic mental disorder classified in this block,
or coexist with some of them, notably delirium (see F05.1).


46


                                F00-F09 ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS

•ami Dementia in Alzheimer's disease

        Alzheimer's disease is a primary degenerative cerebral disease of
        unknown etiology, with characteristic neuropathological and
        neurochemical features. It is usually insidious in onset and develops
        slowly but steadily over a period of years. This period can be as
        short as 2 or 3 years, but can occasionally be considerably longer.
        The onset can be in middle adult life or even earlier (Alzheimer's
        disease with early onset), but the incidence is higher in later life
        (Alzheimer's disease with late onset). In cases with onset before the
        age of 65 - 70, there is the likelihood of a family history of a similar
        dementia, a more rapid course, and prominence of features of tem-
        poral and parietal lobe damage, including dysphasia or dyspraxia.
        In cases with a later onset, the course tends to be slower and to be
        characterized by more general impairment of higher cortical func-
        tions. Patients with Down's syndrome are at high risk of developing
        Alzheimer's disease.

        There are characteristic changes in the brain: a marked reduction
        in the population of neurons, particularly in the hippocampus,
        substantia innominata, locus ceruleus, and temporoparietal and fron-
        tal cortex; appearance of neurofibrillary tangles made of paired helical
        filaments; neuritic (argentophil) plaques, which consist largely of
        amyloid and show a definite progression in their development
        (although plaques without amyloid are also known to exist); and
        granulovacuolar bodies. Neurochemical changes have also been
        found, including a marked reduction in the enzyme choline acetyl-
        transferase, in acetylcholine itself, and in other neurotransmitters
        and neuromodulators.

        As originally described, the clinical features are accompanied by the
        above brain changes. However, it now appears that the two do not
        always progress in parallel: one may be indisputably present with
        only minimal evidence of the other. Nevertheless, the clinical features
        of Alzheimer's disease are such that it is often possible to make a
        presumptive diagnosis on clinical grounds alone.

        Dementia in Alzheimer's disease is at present irreversible.


                                                            47


MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS

        Diagnostic guidelines
        The following features are essential for a definite diagnosis:
        (a) Presence of a dementia as described above.
        (b) Insidious onset with slow deterioration. While the onset usually
           seems difficult to pinpoint in time, realization by others that
           the defects exist may come suddenly. An apparent plateau may
           occur in the progression.
        (c) Absence of clinical evidence, or findings from special investiga-
           tions, to suggest that the mental state may be due to other systemic
           or brain disease which can induce a dementia (e.g. hypo-
           thyroidism, hypercalcaemia, vitamin B12 deficiency, niacin
           deficiency, neurosyphilis, normal pressure hydrocephalus, or
           subdural haematoma).
        (d) Absence of a sudden, apoplectic onset, or of neurological signs
           of focal damage such as hemiparesis, sensory loss, visual field
           defects, and incoordination occurring early in the illness (although
           these phenomena may be superimposed later).

        In a certain proportion of cases, the features of Alzheimer's disease
        and vascular dementia may both be present. In such cases, double
        diagnosis (and coding) should be made. When the vascular dementia
        precedes the Alzheimer's disease, it may be impossible to diagnose
        the latter on clinical grounds.

        Includes: primary degenerative dementia of the Alzheimer's type

        Differential diagnosis. Consider: a depressive disorder (F30 - F39);
        delirium (F05. -); organic amnesic syndrome (F04); other primary
        dementias, such as in Pick's, Creutzfeldt-Jakob or Huntington's
        disease (F02. -); secondary dementias associated with a variety of
        physical diseases, toxic states, etc. (F02.8); mild, moderate or severe
        mental retardation (F70 - F72).

        Dementia in Alzheimer's disease may coexist with vascular dementia
        (to be coded F00.2), as when cerebrovascular episodes (multi-infarct
        phenomena) are superimposed on a clinical picture and history
        suggesting Alzheimer's disease. Such episodes may result in sudden
        exacerbations of the manifestations of dementia. According to
        postmortem findings, both types may coexist in as many as 10 - 15%
        of all dementia cases.

48


                                F00-F09 ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS

F00.0 Dementia in Alzheimer's disease with early onset
        Dementia in Alzheimer's disease beginning before the age of 65. There
        is relatively rapid deterioration, with marked multiple disorders of
        the higher cortical functions. Aphasia, agraphia, alexia, and apraxia
        occur relatively early in the course of the dementia in most cases.

        Diagnostic guidelines
        As for dementia, described above, with onset before the age of
        65 years, and usually with rapid progression of symptoms. Family
        history of Alzheimer's disease is a contributory but not necessary
        factor for the diagnosis, as is a family history of Down's syndrome
        or of lymphoma.

        Includes: Alzheimer's disease, type 2
                presenile dementia, Alzheimer's type

F00.1 Dementia in Alzheimer's disease with late onset
        Dementia in Alzheimer's disease where the clinically observable onset
        is after the age of 65 years and usually in the late 70s or thereafter,
        with a slow progression, and usually with memory impairment as
        the principal feature.

        Diagnostic guidelines
        As for dementia, described above, with attention to the presence
        or absence of features differentiating the disorder from the early-
        onset subtype (F00.0).

        Includes: Alzheimer's disease, type 1
                senile dementia, Alzheimer's type

F00.2 Dementia in Alzheimer's disease, atypical or mixed type
        Dementias that do not fit the descriptions and guidelines for either
        F00.0 or F00.1 should be classified here; mixed Alzheimer's and
        vascular dementias are also included here.

F00.9 Dementia in Alzheimer's disease, unspecified


                                                            49


MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS

|gifj| Vascular dementia

        Vascular (formerly arteriosclerotic) dementia, which includes multi-
        infarct dementia, is distinguished from dementia in Alzheimer's
        disease by its history of onset, clinical features, and subsequent course.
        Typically, there is a history of transient ischaemic attacks with brief
        impairment of consciousness, fleeting pareses, or visual loss. The
        dementia may also follow a succession of acute cerebrovascular
        accidents or, less commonly, a single major stroke. Some impair-
        ment of memory and thinking then becomes apparent. Onset, which
        is usually in later life, can be abrupt, following one particular
        ischaemic episode, or there may be more gradual emergence. The
        dementia is usually the result of infarction of the brain due to vascular
        diseases, including hypertensive cerebrovascular disease. The infarcts
        are usually small but cumulative in their effect.

        Diagnostic guidelines
        The diagnosis presupposes the presence of a dementia as described
        above. Impairment of cognitive function is commonly uneven, so
        that there may be memory loss, intellectual impairment, and focal
        neurological signs. Insight and judgement may be relatively well
        preserved. An abrupt onset or a stepwise deterioration, as well as
        the presence of focal neurological signs and symptoms, increases the
        probability of the diagnosis; in some cases, confirmation can be
        provided only by computerized axial tomography or, ultimately,
        neuropathological examination.

        Associated features are: hypertension, carotid bruit, emotional lability
        with transient depressive mood, weeping or explosive laughter, and
        transient episodes of clouded consciousness or delirium, often pro-
        voked by further infarction. Personality is believed to be relatively
        well preserved, but personality changes may be evident in a propor-
        tion of cases with apathy, disinhibition, or accentuation of previous
        traits such as egocentricity, paranoid attitudes, or irritability.

        Includes: arteriosclerotic dementia

        Differential diagnosis. Consider: delirium (F05. -); other dementia,
        particularly in Alzheimer's disease (F00. -); mood [affective] disorders
        (F30-F39); mild or moderate mental retardation (F70-F71); sub-
        dural haemorrhage (traumatic (S06.5), nontraumatic (162.0)).

50


                                F00-F09 ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS

        Vascular dementia may coexist with dementia in Alzheimer's disease
        (to be coded F00.2), as when evidence of a vascular episode is superim-
        posed on a clinical picture and history suggesting Alzheimer's disease.

F01.0 Vascular dementia of acute onset
        Usually develops rapidly after a succession of strokes from
        cerebrovascular thrombosis, embolism, or haemorrhage. In rare cases,
        a single large infarction may be the cause.

F01.1 Multi-infarct dementia
        This is more gradual in onset than the acute form, following a number
        of minor ischaemic episodes which produce an accumulation of in-
        farcts in the cerebral parenchyma.

        Includes: predominantly cortical dementia

F01.2 Subcortical vascular dementia
        There may be a history of hypertension and foci of ischaemic destruc-
        tion in the deep white matter of the cerebral hemispheres, which can
        be suspected on clinical grounds and demonstrated on computerized
        axial tomography scans. The cerebral cortex is usually preserved and
        this contrasts with the clinical picture, which may closely resemble
        that of dementia in Alzheimer's disease. (Where diffuse demyelination
        of white matter can be demonstrated, the term "Binswanger's
        encephalopathy" may be used.)

F01.3 Mixed cortical and subcortical vascular dementia
        Mixed cortical and subcortical components of the vascular dementia
        may be suspected from the clinical features, the results of investiga-
        tions (including autopsy), or both.

F01.8 Other vascular dementia

F01.9 Vascular dementia, unspecified

|gi£| Dementia in other diseases classified elsewhere

        Cases of dementia due, or presumed to be due, to causes other than
        Alzheimer's disease or cerebrovascular disease. Onset may be at any
        time in life, though rarely in old age.
                                                            51


MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS

        Diagnostic guidelines
        Presence of a dementia as described above; presence of features
        characteristic of one of the specified syndromes, as set out in the
        following categories.

F02.0 Dementia in Pick's disease
        A progressive dementia, commencing in middle life (usually between
        50 and 60 years), characterized by slowly progressing changes of
        character and social deterioration, followed by impairment of
        intellect, memory, and language functions, with apathy, euphoria,
        and (occasionally) extrapyramidal phenomena. The neuropathological
        picture is one of selective atrophy of the frontal and temporal lobes,
        but without the occurrence of neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary
        tangles in excess of that seen in normal aging. Cases with early onset
        tend to exhibit a more malignant course. The social and behavioural
        manifestations often precede frank memory impairment.

        Diagnostic guidelines
        The following features are required for a definite diagnosis:
        (a) a progressive dementia;
        (b) a predominance of frontal lobe features with euphoria, emotional
           blunting, and coarsening of social behaviour, disinhibition, and
           either apathy or restlessness;
        (c) behavioural manifestations, which commonly precede frank
           memory impairment.

        Frontal lobe features are more marked than temporal and parietal,
        unlike Alzheimer's disease.

        Differential diagnosis. Consider: dementia in Alzheimer's disease
        (F00); vascular dementia (F01); dementia secondary to other disorders
        such as neurosyphilis (F02.8); normal pressure hydrocephalus
        (characterized by extreme psychomotor slowing, and gait and sphincter
        disturbances) (G91.2); other neurological or metabolic disorders.

F02.1 Dementia in Creutzfeldt - Jakob disease
        A progressive dementia with extensive neurological signs, due to
        specific neuropathological changes (subacute spongiform
        encephalopathy) that are presumed to be caused by a transmissible
        agent. Onset is usually in middle or later life, typically in the fifth

52


                                F00-F09 ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS

        decade, but may be at any adult age. The course is subacute, leading
        to death within 1-2 years.

        Diagnostic guidelines
        Creutzfeldt - Jakob disease should be suspected in all cases of a
        dementia that progresses fairly rapidly over months to 1 or 2 years
        and that is accompanied or followed by multiple neurological
        symptoms. In some cases, such as the so-called amyotrophic form,
        the neurological signs may precede the onset of the dementia.

        There is usually a progressive spastic paralysis of the limbs, accom-
        panied by extrapyramidal signs with tremor, rigidity, and
        choreoathetoid movements. Other variants may include ataxia, visual
        failure, or muscle fibrillation and atrophy of the upper motor neuron
        type. The triad consisting of
        — rapidly progressing, devastating dementia,
        — pyramidal and extrapyramidal disease with myoclonus, and
        — a characteristic (triphasic) electroencephalogram
        is thought to be highly suggestive of this disease.

        Differential diagnosis. Consider: Alzheimer's disease (F00.-) or
        Pick's disease (F02.0); Parkinson's disease (F02.3); postencephalitic
        parkinsonism (G21.3).

        The rapid course and early motor involvement should suggest
        Creutzfeldt - Jakob disease.

F02.2 Dementia in Huntington's disease
        A dementia occurring as part of a widespread degeneration of the
        brain. Huntington's disease is transmitted by a single autosomal
        dominant gene. Symptoms typically emerge in the third and fourth
        decade, and the sex incidence is probably equal. In a proportion
        of cases, the earliest symptoms may be depression, anxiety, or frank
        paranoid illness, accompanied by a personality change. Progression
        is slow, leading to death usually within 10 to 15 years.

        Diagnostic guidelines
        The association of choreiform movement disorder, dementia, and
        family history of Huntington's disease is highly suggestive of the
        diagnosis, though sporadic cases undoubtedly occur.

                                                            53


MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS

        Involuntary choreiform movements, typically of the face, hands, and
        shoulders, or in the gait, are early manifestations. They usually precede
        the dementia and only rarely remain absent until the dementia is
        very advanced. Other motor phenomena may predominate when the
        onset is at an unusually young age (e.g. striatal rigidity) or at a late
        age (e.g. intention tremor).

        The dementia is characterized by the predominant involvement of
        frontal lobe functions in the early stage, with relative preservation
        of memory until later.

        Includes: dementia in Huntington's chorea

        Differential diagnosis. Consider: other cases of choreic movements;
        Alzheimer's, Pick's or Creutzfeldt - Jakob disease (F00. - , F02.0,
        F02.1).

F02.3 Dementia in Parkinson's disease
        A dementia developing in the course of established Parkinson's disease
        (especially its severe forms). No particular distinguishing clinical
        features have yet been demonstrated. The dementia may be different
        from that in either Alzheimer's disease or vascular dementia; however,
        there is also evidence that it may be the manifestation of a co-
        occurrence of one of these conditions with Parkinson's disease. This
        justifies the identification of cases of Parkinson's disease with
        dementia for research until the issue is resolved.

        Diagnostic guidelines
        Dementia developing in an individual with advanced, usually severe,
        Parkinson's disease.

        Includes: dementia in paralysis agitans
                dementia in parkinsonism

        Differential diagnosis. Consider: other secondary dementias (F02.8);
        multi-infarct dementia (FOl. 1) associated with hypertensive or diabetic
        vascular disease; brain tumour (C70 - C72); normal pressure
        hydrocephalus (G91.2).


54


                                F00-F09 ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS

F02.4 Dementia in human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease
        A disorder characterized by cognitive deficits meeting the clinical
        diagnostic criteria for dementia, in the absence of a concurrent
        illness or condition other than HIV infection that could explain the
        findings.

        HIV dementia typically presents with complaints of forgetfulness,
        slowness, poor concentration, and difficulties with problem-solving
        and reading. Apathy, reduced spontaneity, and social withdrawal
        are common, and in a significant minority of affected individuals
        the illness may present atypically as an affective disorder, psychosis,
        or seizures. Physical examination often reveals tremor, impaired rapid
        repetitive movements, imbalance, ataxia, hypertonia, generalized
        hyperreflexia, positive frontal release signs, and impaired pursuit and
        saccadic eye movements.

        Children also develop an HIV-associated neurodevelopmental disorder
        characterized by developmental delay, hypertonia, microcephaly, and
        basal ganglia calcification. The neurological involvement most often
        occurs in the absence of opportunistic infections and neoplasms, which
        is not the case for adults.

        HIV dementia generally, but not invariably, progresses quickly (over
        weeks or months) to severe global dementia, mutism, and death.

        Includes: AIDS - dementia complex
                HIV encephalopathy or subacute encephalitis

 F02.8 Dementia in other specified diseases classified elsewhere
        Dementia can occur as a manifestation or consequence of a variety
        of cerebral and somatic conditions. To specify the etiology, the ICD-10
        code for the underlying condition should be added.

        Parkinsonism - dementia complex of Guam should also be coded
        here (identified by a fifth character, if necessary). It is a rapidly
        progressing dementia followed by extrapyramidal dysfunction and,
        in some cases, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. The disease was originally
        described on the island of Guam where it occurs with high frequency
        in the indigenous population, affecting twice as many males as
        females; it is now known to occur also in Papua New Guinea and
        Japan.

                                                            55


MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS

        Includes: dementia in:
                carbon monoxide poisoning (T58)
                cerebral lipidosis (E75.-)
                epilepsy (G40.-)
                general paralysis of the insane (A52.1)
                hepatolenticular degeneration (Wilson's disease) (E83.0)
                hypercalcaemia (E83.5)
                hypothyroidism, acquired (E00. - , E02)
                intoxications (T36 — T65)
                multiple sclerosis (G35)
                neurosyphilis (A52.1)
                niacin deficiency [pellagra] (E52)
                polyarteritis nodosa (M30.0)
                systemic lupus erythematosus (M32.-)
                trypanosomiasis (African B56.-, American B57.-)
                vitamin B12 deficiency (E53.8)

|g£] Unspecified dementia

        This category should be used when the general criteria for the diagnosis
        of dementia are satisfied, but when it is not possible to identify one
        of the specific types (F00.0-F02.9).

        Includes: presenile or senile dementia NOS
                presenile or senile psychosis NOS
                primary degenerative dementia NOS

E3 Organic amnesic syndrome, not induced by alcohol
        and other psychoactive substances

        A syndrome of prominent impairment of recent and remote memory.
        While immediate recall is preserved, the ability to learn new material
        is markedly reduced and this results in anterograde amnesia and
        disorientation in time. Retrograde amnesia of varying intensity is
        also present but its extent may lessen over time if the underlying
        lesion or pathological process has a tendency to recover. Confabula-
        tion may be a marked feature but is not invariably present. Percep-
        tion and other cognitive functions, including the intellect, are usually
        intact and provide a background against which the memory distur-

56


                               F00-F09 ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS

       bance appears as particularly striking. The prognosis depends on
       the course of the underlying lesion (which typically affects the
       hypothalamic - diencephalic system or the hippocampal region);
       almost complete recovery is, in principle, possible.

       Diagnostic guidelines
       For a definitive diagnosis it is necessary to establish:
       (a) presence of a memory impairment manifest in a defect of recent
          memory (impaired learning of new material); anterograde and
          retrograde amnesia, and a reduced ability to recall past experiences
          in reverse order of their occurrence;
       (b) history or objective evidence of an insult to, or a disease of,
          the brain (especially with bilateral involvement of the diencephalic
          and medial temporal structures);
       (c) absence of a defect in immediate recall (as tested, for example,
          by the digit span), of disturbances of attention and consciousness,
          and of global intellectual impairment.

       Confabulations, lack of insight, and emotional changes (apathy, lack
       of initiative) are additional, though not in every case necessary,
       pointers to the diagnosis.

       Includes: Korsakov's syndrome or psychosis, nonalcoholic

       Differential diagnosis. This disorder should be distinguished from
       other organic syndromes in which memory impairment is prominent
       (e.g. dementia or delirium), from dissociative amnesia (F44.0), from
       impaired memory function in depressive disorders (F30-F39), and
       from malingering presenting with a complaint of memory loss (Z76.5).
       Korsakov's syndrome induced by alcohol or drugs should not be
       coded here but in the appropriate section (Fix.6).

123 Delirium, not induced by alcohol and other
        psychoactive substances

       An etiologically nonspecific syndrome characterized by concurrent
        disturbances of consciousness and attention, perception, thinking,
        memory, psychomotor behaviour, emotion, and the sleep-wake
        cycle. It may occur at any age but is most common after the age
        of 60 years. The delirious state is transient and of fluctuating

                                                           57


MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS

        intensity; most cases recover within 4 weeks or less. However, delirium
        lasting, with fluctuations, for up to 6 months is not uncommon,
        especially when arising in the course of chronic liver disease,
        carcinoma, or subacute bacterial endocarditis. The distinction that
        is sometimes made between acute and subacute delirium is of little
        clinical relevance; the condition should be seen as a unitary syndrome
        of variable duration and severity ranging from mild to very severe.
        A delirious state may be superimposed on, or progress into, dementia.

        This category should not be used for states of delirium associated
        with the use of psychoactive drugs specified in F10-F19. Delirious
        states due to prescribed medication (such as acute confusional states
        in elderly patients due to antidepressants) should be coded here.
        In such cases, the medication concerned should also be recorded by
        means of an additional T code from Chapter XIX of ICD-10.

        Diagnostic guidelines
        For a definite diagnosis, symptoms, mild or severe, should be present
        in each one of the following areas:
        (a) impairment of consciousness and attention (on a continuum from
           clouding to coma; reduced ability to direct, focus, sustain, and
           shift attention);
        (b) global disturbance of cognition (perceptual distortions, illusions
           and hallucinations — most often visual; impairment of abstract
           thinking and comprehension, with or without transient delusions,
           but typically with some degree of incoherence; impairment of
           immediate recall and of recent memory but with relatively intact
           remote memory; disorientation for time as well as, in more severe
           cases, for place and person);
        (c) psychomotor disturbances (hypo- or hyperactivity and unpre-
           dictable shifts from one to the other; increased reaction time;
           increased or decreased flow of speech; enhanced startle reaction);
        (d) disturbance of the sleep - wake cycle (insomnia or, in severe cases,
           total sleep loss or reversal of the sleep-wake cycle; daytime
           drowsiness; nocturnal worsening of symptoms; disturbing dreams
           or nightmares, which may continue as hallucinations after
           awakening);
        (e) emotional disturbances, e.g. depression, anxiety or fear, irri-
           tability, euphoria, apathy, or wondering perplexity.


58


                               F00-F09 ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS

       The onset is usually rapid, the course diurnally fluctuating, and the
       total duration of the condition less than 6 months. The above clinical
       picture is so characteristic that a fairly confident diagnosis of delirium
       can be made even if the underlying cause is not clearly established.
       In addition to a history of an underlying physical or brain disease,
       evidence of cerebral dysfunction (e.g. an abnormal electroen-
       cephalogram, usually but not invariably showing a slowing of the
       background activity) may be required if the diagnosis is in doubt.

       Includes: acute brain syndrome
               acute confusional state (nonalcoholic)
               acute infective psychosis
               acute organic reaction
               acute psycho-organic syndrome

       Differential diagnosis. Delirium should be distinguished from other
       organic syndromes, especially dementia (F00-F03), from acute and
       transient psychotic disorders (F23.-), and from acute states in
       schizophrenia (F20. -) or mood [affective] disorders (F30-F39) in
       which confusional features may be present. Delirium, induced by
       alcohol and other psychoactive substances, should be coded in the
       appropriate section (Flx.4).

F05.0 Delirium, not superimposed on dementia, so described
       This code should be used for delirium that is not superimposed upon
       pre-existing dementia.

F05.1 Delirium, superimposed on dementia
       This code should be used for conditions meeting the above criteria
       but developing in the course of a dementia (F00-F03).

F05.8 Other delirium
       Includes: delirium of mixed origin
                subacute confusional state or delirium

F05.9 Delirium, unspecified


                                                           59


MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS

•at in Other mental disorders due to brain damage
        and dysfunction and to physical disease

        This category includes miscellaneous conditions causally related to
        brain dysfunction due to primary cerebral disease, to systemic disease
        affecting the brain secondarily, to endocrine disorders such as
        Cushing's syndrome or other somatic illnesses, and to some exogenous
        toxic substances (but excluding alcohol and drugs classified under
        F10-F19) or hormones. These conditions have in common clinical
        features that do not by themselves allow a presumptive diagnosis
        of an organic mental disorder, such as dementia or delirium. Rather,
        the clinical manifestations resemble, or are identical with, those of
        disorders not regarded as "organic" in the specific sense restricted
        to this block of the classification. Their inclusion here is based on
        the hypothesis that they are directly caused by cerebral disease or
        dysfunction rather than resulting from either a fortuitous associa-
        tion with such disease or dysfunction, or a psychological reaction
        to its symptoms, such as schizophrenia-like disorders associated with
        long-standing epilepsy.

        The decision to classify a clinical syndrome here is supported by
        the following:
        (a) evidence of cerebral disease, damage or dysfunction, or of
           systemic physical disease, known to be associated with one of
           the listed syndromes;
        (b) a temporal relationship (weeks or a few months) between the
           development of the underlying disease and the onset of the
           mental syndrome;
        (c) recovery from the mental disorder following removal or improve-
           ment of the underlying presumed cause;
        (d) absence of evidence to suggest an alternative cause of the mental
           syndrome (such as a strong family history or precipitating stress).

        Conditions (a) and (b) justify a provisional diagnosis; if all four are
        present, the certainty of diagnostic classification is significantly in-
        creased.

        The following are among the conditions known to increase the relative
        risk for the syndromes classified here: epilepsy; limbic encephalitis;
        Huntington's disease; head trauma; brain neoplasms; extracranial
        neoplasms with remote CNS effects (especially carcinoma of the

60


                                F00-F09 ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS

        pancreas); vascular cerebral disease, lesions, or malformations;
        lupus erythematosus and other collagen diseases; endocrine disease
        (especially hypo- and hyperthyroidism, Cushing's disease); metabolic
        disorders (e.g. hypoglycaemia, porphyria, hypoxia); tropical infec-
        tious and parasitic diseases (e.g. trypanosomiasis); toxic effects of
        nonpsychotropic drugs (propranolol, levodopa, methyldopa, steroids,
        antihypertensives, antimalarials).

        Excludes: mental disorders associated with delirium (F05.-)
                 mental disorders associated with dementia as classified
                 in F00-F03

F06.0 Organic hallucinosis
        A disorder of persistent or recurrent hallucinations, usually visual
        or auditory, that occur in clear consciousness and may or may not
        be recognized by the subject as such. Delusional elaboration of the
        hallucinations may occur, but insight is not infrequently preserved.

        Diagnostic guidelines
        In addition to the general criteria in the introduction to F06 above,
        there should be evidence of persistent or recurrent hallucinations in
        any modality; no clouding of consciousness; no significant intellec-
        tual decline; no predominant disturbance of mood; and no
        predominance of delusions.

        Includes: Dermatozoenwahn
                organic hallucinatory state (nonalcoholic)

        Excludes: alcoholic hallucinosis (F10.52)
                 schizophrenia (F20. -)

F06.1 Organic catatonic disorder
        A disorder of diminished (stupor) or increased (excitement)
        psychomotor activity associated with catatonic symptoms. The
        extremes of psychomotor disturbance may alternate. It is not known
        whether the full range of catatonic disturbances described in
        schizophrenia occurs in such organic states, nor has it been con-
        clusively determined whether an organic catatonic state may occur
        in clear consciousness or whether it is always a manifestation of
        delirium, with subsequent partial or total amnesia. This calls for
        caution in making this diagnosis and for a careful delimitation of

                                                            61


MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS

        the condition from delirium. Encephalitis and carbon monoxide
        poisoning are presumed to be associated with this syndrome more
        often than other organic causes.

        Diagnostic guidelines
        The general criteria for assuming organic etiology, laid down in the
        introduction to F06, must be met. In addition, there should be one
        of the following:
        (a) stupor (diminution or complete absence of spontaneous move-
           ment with partial or complete mutism, negativism, and rigid
           posturing);
        (b) excitement (gross hypermotility with or without a tendency to
           assaultiveness);
        (c) both (shifting rapidly and unpredictably from hypo- to hyper-
           activity).

        Other catatonic phenomena that increase confidence in the diagnosis
        are: stereotypies, waxy flexibility, and impulsive acts.

        Excludes: catatonic schizophrenia (20.2)
                 dissociative stupor (F44.2)
                 stupor NOS (R40.1)

F06.2 Organic delusional [schizophrenia-like] disorder
        A disorder in which persistent or recurrent delusions dominate the
        clinical picture. The delusions may be accompanied by hallucina-
        tions but are not confined to their content. Features suggestive of
        schizophrenia, such as bizarre delusions, hallucinations, or thought
        disorder, may also be present.

        Diagnostic guidelines
        The general criteria for assuming an organic etiology, laid down in
        the introduction to F06, must be met. In addition, there should be
        delusions (persecutory, of bodily change, jealousy, disease, or death
        of the subject or another person). Hallucinations, thought disorder,
        or isolated catatonic phenomena may be present. Consciousness and
        memory must not be affected. This diagnosis should not be made
        if the presumed evidence of organic causation is nonspecific or limited
        to findings such as enlarged cerebral ventricles (visualized on
        computerized axial tomography) or "soft" neurological signs.

62


                                F00-F09 ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS

        Includes: paranoid and paranoid-hallucinatory organic states
                schizophrenia-like psychosis in epilepsy

        Excludes: acute and transient psychotic disorders (F23.-)
                 drug-induced psychotic disorders (Fix.5)
                 persistent delusional disorder (F22.-)
                 schizophrenia (F20. -)

F06.3 Organic mood [affective] disorders
        Disorders characterized by a change in mood or affect, usually
        accompanied by a change in the overall level of activity. The only
        criterion for inclusion of these disorders in this block is their presumed
        direct causation by a cerebral or other physical disorder whose
        presence must either be demonstrated independently (e.g. by means
        of appropriate physical and laboratory investigations) or assumed
        on the basis of adequate history information. The affective disorder
        must follow the presumed organic factor and be judged not to
        represent an emotional response to the patient's knowledge of
        having, or having the symptoms of, a concurrent brain disorder.

        Postinfective depression (e.g. following influenza) is a common
        example and should be coded here. Persistent mild euphoria not
        amounting to hypomania (which is sometimes seen, for instance,
        in association with steroid therapy or antidepressants) should not
        be coded here but under F06.8.

        Diagnostic guidelines
        In addition to the general criteria for assuming organic etiology,
        laid down in the introduction to F06, the condition must meet
        the requirements for a diagnosis of one of the disorders listed
        under F3O-F33.

        Excludes: mood [affective] disorders, nonorganic or unspecified
                   (F30-F39)
                 right hemispheric affective disorder (F07.8)

        The following five-character codes might be used to specify the clinical
        disorder:
        F06.30 Organic manic disorder
        F06.31 Organic bipolar affective disorder

                                                            63


MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS

        F06.32 Organic depressive disorder
        F06.33 Organic mixed affective disorder

F06.4 Organic anxiety disorder
        A disorder characterized by the essential descriptive features of a
        generalized anxiety disorder (F41.1), a panic disorder (F41.0), or a
        combination of both, but arising as a consequence of an organic
        disorder capable of causing cerebral dysfunction (e.g. temporal lobe
        epilepsy, thyrotoxicosis, or phaechromocytoma).

        Excludes: anxiety disorders, nonorganic or unspecified (F41.-)

F06.5 Organic dissociative disorder
        A disorder that meets the requirements for one of the disorders in
        F44. - (dissociative [conversion] disorder) and for which the general
        criteria for organic etiology are also fulfilled (as described in the
        introduction to this block).

        Excludes: dissociative [conversion] disorders, nonorganic or
                  unspecified (F44.-)

F06.6 Organic emotionally labile [asthenic] disorder
        A disorder characterized by marked and persistent emotional
        incontinence or lability, fatiguability, or a variety of unpleasant
        physical sensations (e.g. dizziness) and pains regarded as being due
        to the presence of an organic disorder. This disorder is thought to
        occur in association with cerebrovascular disease or hypertension more
        often than with other causes.

        Excludes: somatoform disorders, nonorganic or unspecified (F45. -)

 F06.7 Mild cognitive disorder
        This disorder may precede, accompany, or follow a wide variety
        of infections and physical disorders, both cerebral and systemic
         (including HIV infection). Direct neurological evidence of cerebral
        involvement is not necessarily present, but there may nevertheless
        be distress and interference with usual activities. The boundaries of
        this category are still to be firmly established. When associated with
         a physical disorder from which the patient recovers, mild cognitive
         disorder does not last for more than a few additional weeks. This
         diagnosis should not be made if the condition is clearly attributable

 64


                                F00-F09 ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS

        to a mental or behavioural disorder classified in any of the remaining
        blocks in this book.

        Diagnostic guidelines
        The main feature is a decline in cognitive performance. This may
        include memory impairment, learning or concentration difficulties.
        Objective tests usually indicate abnormality. The symptoms are such
        that a diagnosis of dementia (F00-F03), organic amnesic syndrome
        (F04) or delirium (F05.-) cannot be made.

        Differential diagnosis. The disorder can be differentiated from
        postencephalitic syndrome (F07.1) and postconcussional syndrome
        (F07.2) by its different etiology, more restricted range of generally
        milder symptoms, and usually shorter duration.

F06.8 Other specified mental disorders due to brain damage and
        dysfunction and to physical disease
        Examples are abnormal mood states occurring during treatment with
        steroids or antidepressants.

        Includes: epileptic psychosis NOS

F06.9 Unspecified mental disorder due to brain damage and dysfunc-
        tion and to physical disease

Igifjfl Personality and behavioural disorders due to
        brain disease, damage and dysfunction

        Alteration of personality and behaviour can be a residual or con-
        comitant disorder of brain disease, damage, or dysfunction. In some
        instances, differences in the manifestation of such residual or con-
        comitant personality and behavioural syndromes may be suggestive
        of the type and/or localization of the intracerebral problem, but
        the reliability of this kind of diagnostic inference should not be
        overestimated. Thus the underlying etiology should always be sought
        by independent means and, if known, recorded.


                                                            65


MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS

F07.0 Organic personality disorder
        This disorder is characterized by a significant alteration of the habitual
        patterns of premorbid behaviour. The expression of emotions, needs,
        and impulses is particularly affected. Cognitive functions may be
        defective mainly or even exclusively in the areas of planning and
        anticipating the likely personal and social consequences, as in the
        so-called frontal lobe syndrome. However, it is now known that this
        syndrome occurs not only with frontal lobe lesions but also with
        lesions to other circumscribed areas of the brain.

        Diagnostic guidelines
        In addition to an established history or other evidence of brain disease,
        damage, or dysfunction, a definitive diagnosis requires the presence
        of two or more of the following features:
        (a) consistently reduced ability to persevere with goal-directed
           activities, especially those involving longer periods of time and
           postponed gratification;
        (b) altered emotional behaviour, characterized by emotional labili-
           ty, shallow and unwarranted cheerfulness (euphoria, inappropriate
           jocularity), and easy change to irritability or short-lived outbursts
           of anger and aggression; in some instances apathy may be a more
           prominent feature;
        (c) expression of needs and impulses without consideration of con-
           sequences or social convention (the patient may engage in dissocial
           acts, such as stealing, inappropriate sexual advances, or voracious
           eating, or may exhibit disregard for personal hygiene);
        (d) cognitive disturbances, in the form of suspiciousness or paranoid
           ideation, and/or excessive preoccupation with a single, usually
           abstract, theme (e.g. religion, "right" and "wrong");
        (e) marked alteration of the rate and flow of language production,
           with features such as circumstantiality, over-inclusiveness,
           viscosity, and hypergraphia;
        (f) altered sexual behaviour (hyposexuality or change of sexual
           preference).

        Includes: frontal lobe syndrome
                limbic epilepsy personality syndrome
                lobotomy syndrome
                organic pseudopsychopathic personality
                organic pseudoretarded personality
                postleucotomy syndrome

66


                                F00-F09 ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS

        Excludes: enduring personality change after catastrophic experience
                  (F62.0)
                enduring personality change after psychiatric illness (F62.1)
                postconcussional syndrome (F07.2)
                 postencephalitic syndrome (F07.1)
                 specific personality disorder (F60.-)

F07.1 Postencephalitic syndrome
        The syndrome includes residual behavioural change following recovery
        from either viral or bacterial encephalitis. Symptoms are nonspecific
        and vary from individual to individual, from one infectious agent
        to another, and, most consistently, with the age of the individual
        at the time of infection. The principal difference between this disorder
        and the organic personality disorders is that it is often reversible.

        Diagnostic guidelines
        The manifestations may include general malaise, apathy or irritability,
        some lowering of cognitive functioning (learning difficulties), altered
        sleep and eating patterns, and changes in sexuality and in social
        judgement. There may be a variety of residual neurological dysfunc-
        tions such as paralysis, deafness, aphasia, constructional apraxia,
        and acalculia.

        Excludes: organic personality disorder (F07.0)

F07.2 Postconcussional syndrome
        The syndrome occurs following head trauma (usually sufficiently
        severe to result in loss of consciousness) and includes a number of
        disparate symptoms such as headache, dizziness (usually lacking
        the features of true vertigo), fatigue, irritability, difficulty in
        concentrating and performing mental tasks, impairment of memory,
        insomnia, and reduced tolerance to stress, emotional excitement,
        or alcohol. These symptoms may be accompanied by feelings of
        depression or anxiety, resulting from some loss of self-esteem and
        fear of permanent brain damage. Such feelings enhance the original
        symptoms and a vicious circle results. Some patients become
        hypochondriacal, embark on a search for diagnosis and cure, and
        may adopt a permanent sick role. The etiology of these symptoms
        is not always clear, and both organic and psychological factors have
        been proposed to account for them. The nosological status of this
        condition is thus somewhat uncertain. There is little doubt, however,
        that this syndrome is common and distressing to the patient.

                                                            67


MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS

        Diagnostic guidelines
        At least three of the features described above should be present for
        a definite diagnosis. Careful evaluation with laboratory techniques
        (electroencephalography, brain stem evoked potentials, brain
        imaging, oculonystagmography) may yield objective evidence to
        substantiate the symptoms but results are often negative. The
        complaints are not necessarily associated with compensation motives.

        Includes: postcontusional syndrome (encephalopathy)
                post-traumatic brain syndrome, nonpsychotic

F07.8 Other organic personality and behavioural disorders due to
        brain disease, damage and dysfunction
        Brain disease, damage, or dysfunction may produce a variety of
        cognitive, emotional, personality, and behavioural disorders, not all
        of which are classifiable under the preceding rubrics. However, since
        the nosological status of the tentative syndromes in this area is
        uncertain, they should be coded as "other". A fifth character may
        be added, if necessary, to identify presumptive individual entities
        such as:

        Right hemispheric organic affective disorder (changes in the ability
        to express or comprehend emotion in individuals with right hemisphere
        disorder). Although the patient may superficially appear to be
        depressed, depression is not usually present: it is the expression of
        emotion that is restricted.

        Also code here:
        (a) any other specified but presumptive syndromes of personality
           or behavioural change due to brain disease, damage, or dysfunc-
           tion other than those listed under F07.0-F07.2; and
        (b) conditions with mild degrees of cognitive impairment not yet
           amounting to dementia in progressive mental disorders such as
           Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, etc. The diagnosis
           should be changed when the criteria for dementia are fulfilled.

        Excludes: delirium (F05.-)


68


                                    F00-F09 ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS

F07.9 Unspecified organic personality and behavioural disorder
         due to brain disease, damage and dysfunction

         Includes: organic psychosyndrome

•am Unspecified organic or symptomatic mental disorder

         This category should only be used for recording mental disorders
         of known organic etiology.

         Includes: organic psychosis NOS
                  symptomatic psychosis NOS

         Excludes: psychosis NOS (F29)
