


DSM-ffl


First Printing, February 1980
 Second Printing, May 1980


    Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual
 of Mental Disorders
    (Third Edition)


                             Library of Congress Catalogue Number 79-055868
                       Copyright © The American Psychiatric Association, 1980


                                 All rights reserved. No part of this book may
                                be reproduced in any form without permission
                                    in writing from the American Psychiatric
                                  Association, except by a reviewer who may
                                       quote brief passages in a review to be
                                   published in a journal, magazine, or news-
                                  paper. Correspondence regarding copyright
                                       should be directed to the Division of
                                Public Affairs, American Psychiatric Associa-
                                   tion, 1700 18th Street, N.W., Washington,
                                                         D.C. 20009.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This manual was prepared with the help of many people. Special thanks are
given to the members of the Task Force on Nomenclature and Statistics, the
various Advisory Committees and Other Consultants, and the members of the
Assembly Liaison Task Force on DSM-III and the Board of Trustees Ad Hoc
Committee on DSM-III. In addition, the work of the Field Trial participants,
who are listed in Appendix F, is gratefully appreciated.
    The following members of the American Psychiatric Association provided
valuable help in arriving at creative solutions to difficult problems at various
stages in the development of DSM-III: Drs. Alan A. Stone, President, and
Chair, Board of Trustees; Donald G. Langsley, President-elect, and Chair, Ref-
erence Committee; Lester Grinspoon, Chair, Council on Research and Develop-
ment; Edward J. Sachar, DSM-III liaison from Council on Research and
Development; Melvin Sabshin, Medical Director; and Henry H. Work, Deputy
Medical Director and DSM-III staff liaison.
    Janet B. W. Williams, M.S.W., was invaluable in coordinating the Field
Trials, in working with members of the Advisory Committees preparing sections
of DSM-III, and in integrating the extensive critiques of draft versions in the
preparation of the final manual. Harriet Ayers's skill in keeping track of a volu-
minous correspondence and in typing revision after revision is deeply appre-
ciated.
    A final word of thanks must be given to the many other participants in this
effort who have not received formal recognition, but who provided critiques and
suggestions that were helpful in the preparation of DSM-III.


                                    Robert L. Spitzer, M.D.
                                    Chairperson, Task Force on
                                    Nomenclature and Statistics


TASK FORCE ON NOMENCLATURE AND STATISTICS
Robert L. Spitzer, M.D., Chairperson Morton Kramer, Sc.D.*
 Nancy Andreasen, M.D., Ph.D. Z.J. Lipowski, M.D.
 Robert L. Arnstein, M.D. Michael L. Mavroidis, M.D.
 Dennis Cantwell, M.D. Theodore Millon, Ph.D.*
 Paula J. Clayton, M.D. Henry Pinsker, M.D.
 Jean Endicott, Ph.D.* George Saslow, M.D., Ph.D.
 William A. Frosch, M.D. Michael Sheehy, M.D.
 Rachel Gittelman, Ph.D.* Robert Woodruff, M.D. (deceased)
 Donald W. Goodwin, M.D. Lyman C. Wynne, M.D., Ph.D.
 Donald F. Klein, M.D.
 * Consultants

 ADVISORY COMMITTEES
 ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS
 Robert Byck, M.D. John Kuehnle, M.D.
 Paula J. Clayton, M.D. Z.J. Lipowski, M.D.
 Gene D. Cohen, M.D. Benjamin Seltzer, M.D.
 William A. Frosch, M.D. Robert L. Spitzer, M.D.
 Donald W. Goodwin, M.D. Phillip Zeidenberg, M.D., Ph.D.
 Barry Gurland, M.D.

 SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS
 Sidney Cohen, M.D. Robert M. Morse, M.D.
 Everett Ellinwood, M.D. William M. Petrie, M.D.
 William A. Frosch, M.D. Richard B. Resnick, M.D.
 Michael I. Good, M.D. Lee N. Robins, Ph.D.
 Donald W. Goodwin, M.D. Henry L. Rosett, M.D.
Jerome H. Jaffe, M.D. Robert L. Spitzer, M.D.
 Edward J. Khantzian, M.D. Phillip Zeidenberg, M.D., Ph.D.
 John Kuehnle, M.D. Sheldon Zimberg, M.D.
 Roger E. Meyer, M.D. Janet B.W. Williams, M.S.W.

 SCHIZOPHRENIC, PARANOID, AND AFFECTIVE DISORDERS
Nancy Andreasen, M.D., Ph.D. Harrison G. Pope, Jr., M.D.
 Paula J. Clayton, M.D. Robert L. Spitzer, M.D.
 Jean Endicott, Ph.D. Janet B.W. Williams, M.S.W.
 Joseph F. Lipinski, M.D. Robert Woodruff, M.D. (deceased)
 Michael L. Mavroidis, M.D. Lyman C. Wynne, M.D., Ph.D.

 ANXIETY AND DISSOCIATIVE DISORDERS
 Jean Endicott, Ph.D. George Saslow, M.D., Ph.D.
 Michael Gelder, M.D. Michael Sheehy, M.D.
 Donald F. Klein, M.D. Robert L. Spitzer, M.D.
 Isaac Marks, M.D.


 FACTITIOUS AND SOMATOFORM DISORDERS
 Paula J. Clayton, M.D. David A. Soskis, M.D.
 Steven E. Hyler, M.D. Robert L. Spitzer, M.D.
 Paul Luisada, M.D. Norman Sussman, M.D.
Roger Peele, M.D.

 PERSONALITY DISORDERS
 Allen J. Frances, M.D.            Theodore Millon, Ph.D.
 Steven E. Hyler, M.D.             Henry Pinsker, M.D.
Donald F. Klein, M.D.              Lee N. Robins, Ph.D.
John Lion, M.D.                    Michael Sheehy, M.D.
Roger A. MacKinnon, M.D.           Robert L. Spitzer, M.D.

 PSYCHOSEXUAL DISORDERS
Anke A. Ehrhardt, Ph.D.            Jon K. Meyer, M.D.
Diane S. Fordney-Settlage, M.D.    John Money, Ph.D.
Richard Friedman, M.D.             Ethel Person, M.D.
Paul Gebhard, Ph.D.                Lawrence Sharpe, M.D.
 Richard Green, M.D.               Robert L. Spitzer, M.D.
Helen S. Kaplan, M.D., Ph.D.       Robert J. Stoller, M.D.
Judith B. Kuriansky, Ed.M.         Arthur Zitrin, M.D.
Harold I. Lief, M.D.

 INFANCY, CHILDHOOD AND ADOLESCENCE DISORDERS
 Robert L. Arnstein, M.D.          J. Gary May, M.D.
Justin D. Call, M.D.               Joaquim Puig-Antich, M.D.
Dennis Cantwell, M.D.              Judith Rapoport, M.D.
 Stella Chess, M.D.                David Shaffer, M.D.
 Everett Dulit, M.D.               Richard Ward, M.D.
 Rachel Gittelman, Ph.D.           Paul Wender, M.D.
 Richard Jenkins, M.D.

 EATING DISORDERS
Hilde Bruch, M.D.                  Katherine Halmi, M.D.
James M. Ferguson, M.D.            Albert James Stunkard, M.D.

 REACTIVE DISORDERS
Nancy Andreasen, M.D., Ph.D.       Jack Smith
Robert J. Lifton, M.D.             Robert L. Spitzer, M.D.
Chaim F. Shatan, M.D.              Lyman C. Wynne, M.D., Ph.D.

 IMPULSE CONTROL DISORDERS
Robert L. Custer, M.D.             John Lion, M.D.
John Frosch, M.D.                  Nicholas D. Rizzo, M.D.
William A. Frosch, M.D.            Robert L. Spitzer, M.D.
Donald F. Klein, M.D.


 PSYCHOSOMATIC DISORDERS
 James Brophy, M.D.                Martin R. Lipp, M.D.
 Igor Grant, M.D.                  John G. Looney, M.D.
 E.K. Gunderson, M.D.              Edwin J. Olsen, M.D.

 MULTIAXIAL DIAGNOSIS
 Dennis Cantwell, M.D.             James Morgan, M.D.
 William Carpenter, M.D.           David Shaffer, M.D.
 Jean Endicott, Ph.D.              Robert Simon, M.A.
 Miriam Gibbon, M.S.W.             Robert L. Spitzer, M.D.
 Frederic W. Ilfeld, Jr., M.D.     John S. Strauss, M.D.
 Frederic Kass, M.D.               Janet B.W. Williams, M.S.W.
 Juan E. Mezzich, M.D., Ph.D.

 GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS
 Nancy Andreasen, M.D., Ph.D.      Michael Sheehy, M.D.
 Steven E. Hyler, M.D.             Robert L. Spitzer, M.D.
 Jerrold S. Maxmen, M.D.           Janet B.W. Williams, M.S.W.
 Lawrence Sharpe, M.D.

 OTHER CONSULTANTS
 Lorian Baker, Ph.D.               Norman Sartorius, M.D., Ph.D.
 Robert Cloninger, M.D.            Robert H. Seeman, M.A.
John E. Cooper, M.D.               Arthur Shapiro, M.D.
 Irving Gottesman, Ph.D.           Elaine Shapiro, Ph.D.
 Samuel Guze, M.D.                 Abby Sher, M.A.
Assen Jablensky, M.D.              Andrew E. Skodol, M.D.
 Gerald Klerman, M.D.              Richard A. Sternbach, Ph.D.
 Eli Robins, M.D.                  John K. Wing, M.D., Ph.D.
 Howard Roffwarg, M.D.             George Winokur, M.D.
 Michael Rutter, M.D.

ASSEMBLY LIAISON TASK FORCE ON DSM-III
Hector Jaso, M.D., Chairperson     Roger Peele, M.D.
 Howard Berk, M.D.                 Kenneth Pitts, M.D.
 Robert Bittle, M.D.               Erwin R. Smarr, M.D.
 Harvey Bluestone, M.D.            Granville Tolley, M.D.
 Richard Finn, M.D.                Stephen Washburn, M.D.
Jerry Morrow, M.D.                 Walter Winslow, M.D.
 K.C.R. Nair, M.D.

BOARD OF TRUSTEES AD HOC COMMITTEE ON DSM-III
H. Keith H. Brodie, M.D., Chairperson John A. Talbott, M.D.
Robert Campbell, M.D. Jules H. Masserman, M.D. (ex officio)
Lew Robbins, M.D.


 TEXT EDITOR
 Janet B.W. Williams, M.S.W.

 PRODUCTION
 Ronald E. McMillen
Kenneth B. Hausman


                                                 J"**™**! i i


                                                              Page
Introduction 1
CHAPTER 1 DSM-III Classification: Axes I and II Categories and Codes 15
CHAPTER 2 Use of This Manual 23
CHAPTER 3 The Diagnostic Categories: Text and Criteria 35
             Disorders Usually First Evident in Infancy, Childhood, or
              Adolescence 35
             Organic Mental Disorders 101
             Substance Use Disorders 163
             Schizophrenic Disorders 181
             Paranoid Disorders 195
             Psychotic Disorders Not Elsewhere Classified 199
             Affective Disorders 205
             Anxiety Disorders 225
             Somatoform Disorders 241
             Dissociative Disorders (Hysterical Neuroses, Dissociative
              Type) 253
             Psychosexual Disorders 261
             Factitious Disorders 285
             Disorders of Impulse Control Not Elsewhere Classified 291
             Adjustment Disorder 299
             Psychological Factors Affecting Physical Condition 303
             Personality Disorders 305
             V Codes for Conditions Not Attributable to a Mental
               Disorder That Are a Focus of Attention or Treatment 331
             Additional Codes 335
Appendix A Decision Trees for Differential Diagnosis 339
Appendix B Glossary of Technical Terms 353
Appendix C Annotated Comparative Listing of DSM-II and DSM-III 371
Appendix D Historical Review, ICD-9 Glossary and Classification, and
               ICD-9-CM Classification 399
Appendix E Classification of Sleep and Arousal Disorders 461
Appendix F DSM-III Field Trials: Interrater Reliability and Listing of
              Participants 467
Index 483


This page intentionally left blank 


Introduction


This page intentionally left blank 


                                           Introduction
                                         Robert L. Spitzer, Chairperson
                              Task Force on Nomenclature and Statistics
                                      American Psychiatric Association


This is the third edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders of the American Psychiatric Association, better known simply as
DSM-III. The development of this manual over the last five years has not gone
unnoticed; in fact, it is remarkable how much interest (alarm, despair, excite-
ment, joy) has been shown in successive drafts of this document. The reasons
for this interest are many.
    First of all, over the last decade there has been growing recognition of the
importance of diagnosis for both clinical practice and research. Clinicians and
research investigators must have a common language with which to communicate
about the disorders for which they have professional responsibility. Planning a
treatment program must begin with an accurate diagnostic assessment. The
efficacy of various treatment modalities can be compared only if patient groups
are described using diagnostic terms that are clearly defined.
    Secondly, from its very beginning, drafts of DSM-III have been widely
circulated for critical review and use by clinicians and investigators. This made
them aware of the many fundamental ways in which DSM-III differs from its
predecessor, DSM-II, and from its international contemporary, the mental dis-
orders chapter of the ninth revision of the International Classification of Diseases
(ICD-9). For example, DSM-III includes such new features as diagnostic criteria,
a multiaxial approach to evaluation, much-expanded descriptions of the disorders
and many additional categories (some with newly-coined names); and it does
not include several time-honored categories.
    Finally, interest in the development of this manual is due to awareness that
DSM-III reflects an increased commitment in our field to reliance on data as the
basis for understanding mental disorders.

BACKGROUND*
The first edition of the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual of Mental Disorders appeared in 1952. This was the first official
manual of mental disorders to contain a glossary of descriptions of the diagnostic
categories. The use of the term "reaction" throughout the classification reflected
the influence of Adolf Meyer's psychobiological view that mental disorders
represented reactions of the personality to psychological, social, and biological
factors. In the development of the second edition (DSM-II), a decision was made
to base the classification on the mental disorders section of the eighth revision
of the International Classification of Diseases, for which representatives of the
American Psychiatric Association had provided consultation. Both DSM-II and

* Some readers may wish, for now, to skip Background and The Process of Development of DSM-III
and plunge directly into Basic Concepts on p.5.
                                1


2 Introduction

ICD-8 went into effect in 1968. The DSM-II classification did not use the term
"reaction" and used diagnostic terms that by and large did not imply a particular
theoretical framework for understanding the nonorganic mental disorders.
    In 1974 the American Psychiatric Association, through its Council on Re-
search and Development, appointed a Task Force on Nomenclature and Statistics
to begin work on the development of DSM-III, recognizing that ICD-9 was
scheduled to go into effect in January 1979. By the time this new Task Force
was constituted, the mental disorders section of ICD-9, which included its own
glossary, was nearly completed. Although representatives of the American Psy-
chiatric Association had worked closely with the World Health Organization in
the development of ICD-9, there was some concern that the ICD-9 classification
and glossary would not be suitable for use in the United States. Most impor-
tantly, many specific areas of the classification did not seem sufficiently detailed
for clinical and research use. For example, the ICD-9 classification contains only
one category for "frigidity and impotence"—despite the substantial work in the
area of psychosexual dysfunctions that has identified several specific types with
different clinical pictures and treatment implications. In addition, the glossary of
ICD-9 was believed by many to be less than optimal in that it had not made use
of such recent major methodological developments as specified diagnostic criteria
and the multiaxial approach to evaluation.
    For these reasons the Task Force was directed to prepare a new classification
and glossary that would, as much as possible, reflect the most current state of
knowledge regarding mental disorders while maintaining compatibility with
ICD-9. Like its predecessors, DSM-I and DSM-II, DSM-III had to be, first of all,
clinically useful, while also providing a basis for research and administrative use.

    The Task Force. Task Force members, and consultants from the fields of
psychology and epidemiology, were selected because of their special interest in
various aspects of diagnosis. Most had made significant contributions to the
literature on diagnosis. As the work progressed, additional members were added
to ensure representation of different perspectives and areas of expertise.
    From the beginning, the Task Force functioned as a steering committee to
oversee the ongoing work. All of its members shared a commitment to the attain-
ment in DSM-III of the following goals:
  —clinical usefulness for making treatment and management decisions in varied
    clinical settings;
  —reliability of the diagnostic categories;
  —acceptability to clinicians and researchers of varying theoretical orientations;
  —usefulness for educating health professionals;
  —maintaining compatibility with ICD-9, except when departures are unavoid-
    able;
  —avoiding the introduction of new terminology and concepts that break with
    tradition, except when clearly needed;
  —reaching consensus on the meaning of necessary diagnostic terms that have
    been used inconsistently, and avoiding the use of terms that have outlived
    their usefulness;
  —consistency with data from research studies bearing on the validity of
    diagnostic categories;


                                                     Introduction 3

  —suitability for describing subjects in research studies;
  —being responsive during the development of DSM-III to critiques by clini-
    cians and researchers.
    The major job of the Task Force has been to determine the most effective
strategies for ensuring that the final document attained each goal to as great an
extent as possible without compromising the other goals. Thus, the Task Force
evaluated all proposals for changes in DSM-III that might affect the attainment
of these goals. These proposals came from members of the Task Force, advisory
committees, liaison committees with professional organizations, and participants
in the DSM-III Field Trials. Finally, the Task Force reviewed drafts of the text
and diagnostic criteria.
    In attempting to resolve various diagnostic issues, the Task Force relied, as
much as possible, on research evidence relevant to various kinds of diagnostic
validity. For example, when discussing a problematic diagnostic category, the
Task Force considered how the disorder, if defined as proposed, provided in-
formation relevant to treatment planning, course, and familial pattern. It should
come as no surprise to the reader that even when data were available from
relevant research studies, Task Force members often differed in their interpreta-
tions of the findings.

    Advisory Committees and Other Consultants. Successive drafts of DSM-III
were prepared by fourteen advisory committees composed of individuals with
special expertise in each substantive area. In addition, a group of consultants
provided advice and information on a variety of special areas.

    Council on Research and Development. This component of the American
Psychiatric Association appointed the Task Force and regularly reviewed progress
being made in the development of DSM-III. In addition, in the fall of 1978 the
Council held an all-day meeting at which some APA members voiced concerns
about certain aspects of DSM-III. After reviewing these concerns, the Council
approved the Task Force's approach to solutions of the problems that had been
raised.

    Assembly Liaison Committee. In early 1976, the APA Assembly, composed
of representatives from all of the APA's district branches, appointed a Liaison
Committee to review the development of DSM-III and to report regularly to the
Assembly. This committee received correspondence on major issues, reviewed
successive drafts of DSM-III, and met a number of times with the chairperson
of the Task Force. On several occasions the Assembly Liaison Committee ar-
ranged for the chairperson of the Task Force to discuss a particular controversial
issue with the entire Assembly. The Assembly Liaison Committee was invaluable
in articulating the concerns of the membership of the APA, which is compose
largely of clinicians whose primary professional activity is patient care.

    Other Components of the APA. The chairperson of the Task Force reported
on several occasions to the Reference Committee and the Board of Trustees on
specific issues of concern. In addition, in April 1979, a meeting was held with an


4 Introduction

Ad Hoc Committee on DSM-III of the Board of Trustees to review specific
concerns about DSM-III that had been expressed by members of the APA. Other
components of the APA, such as the Committee on Confidentiality and the Com-
mittee on Women, also reviewed DSM-III from their own perspectives as it was
being developed.

    Liaison with Other Professional Organizations. The following groups that
were particularly interested in the development of DSM-III established liaison
committees with the Task Force: the Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, the
American Academy of Child Psychiatry, the American Academy of Psycho-
analysis, the American Association of Chairmen of Departments of Psychiatry,
the American College Health Association, the American Orthopsychiatric Asso-
ciation, the American Psychoanalytic Association, and the American Psychologi-
cal Association. These committees received drafts of DSM-III and were invited
to make comments and suggestions and to express their concerns. In most
instances, differences in points of view between a liaison committee and the
Task Force were resolved to the satisfaction of all concerned. When this was not
possible and differences were left unresolved, the issues were at least clarified.

THE PROCESS OF DEVELOPMENT OF DSM-III
In May 1975, at a special session of the Annual Meeting of the APA, an initial
draft of the DSM-III classification was presented. At each subsequent Annual
Meeting a special session was held on some aspect of DSM-III. In addition, a
special conference was held in St. Louis, Missouri, in June 1976, to examine
"DSM-III in Midstream." This conference, co-sponsored by the Missouri Insti-
tute of Psychiatry and the American Psychiatric Association, was attended by
approximately 100 professionals with expertise or special interests in various
aspects of DSM-III, most of whom had previously had no direct involvement
in the development of DSM-III. As a result of discussions at this conference,
additional diagnostic categories were added, some were deleted, and a decision
was made to proceed with the development of the multiaxial system.
    The DSM-III classification and the rationale for the strategies used in its
development have been presented throughout the past four years at local, na-
tional, and international professional meetings. In addition, the 4/15/77 draft
and successive drafts of DSM-III have been available to the profession for
critical review. Throughout this period there has been continual consideration of
various solutions to difficult diagnostic problems, often based on summaries of
actual cases submitted to the Task Force from all quarters. Whenever possible,
attempts have been made to seek the advice of experts in each specific area
under consideration.

    Field Trials. In the past, new classifications of mental disorders have not
been extensively subjected to clinical trials before official adoption. The Task
Force believed that field trials using drafts of DSM-III should be conducted
during the development process to identify problem areas in the classification
and to try out solutions to these problems. In addition, because of the many
proposed changes in the classification, it was important to demonstrate its clini-


                                                     Introduction 5

cal acceptability and usefulness in a variety of settings by clinicians of varying
theoretical orientations.
    For these reasons, a series of field trials was conducted, beginning in 1977
and culminating in a two year NIMH-sponsored field trial from September
1977 to September 1979. In all, 12,667 patients were evaluated by approxi-
mately 550 clinicians, 474 of whom were in 212 different facilities, using suc-
cessive drafts of DSM-III. Critiques of all portions of DSM-III by the field trial
participants resulted in numerous changes, as did reviews of case summaries sub-
mitted by those participants. Frequently, participants completed questionnaires
regarding specific diagnostic issues and their attitudes toward DSM-III and its
innovative features. The results indicated that the great majority of participants,
regardless of theoretical orientations, had a favorable response to DSM-III.
    Perhaps the most important part of the study was the evaluation of diag-
nostic reliability by having pairs of clinicians make independent diagnostic
judgments of several hundred patients. The results, which are presented in an
appendix, generally indicate far greater reliability than had previously been
obtained with DSM-II.

    ICD-9-CM. Because of dissatisfaction with ICD-9 expressed by organiza-
tions representing subspecialties of medicine (not including the American Psychi-
atric Association), a decision was made to modify the ICD-9 for use in the
United States by expanding the four-digit ICD-9 codes to five-digit ICD-9-CM
(for clinical modification) codes whenever greater specificity was required. This
modification was prepared for the United States National Center for Health
Statistics by the Council on Clinical Classifications. The American Psychiatric
Association, in December 1976, was invited to submit recommendations for
alternate names and additional categories based on subdivisions of already exist-
ing ICD-9 categories. This made it possible for the developing DSM-III classifi-
cation and its diagnostic terms to be included in the ICD-9-CM classification,
which in January 1979 became the official system in this country for recording
all "diseases, injuries, impairments, symptoms, and causes of death." The ICD-
9-CM codes and diagnostic terms for mental disorders are included in Appendix
D.
    Many ICD-9-CM codes and terms are not included in the DSM-III classi-
fication. However, these are generally acceptable to third party payers and most
record-keeping systems.

    Final Approval. In May 1979, at the Annual Meeting of the APA in Chi-
cago, the Assembly and the Council on Research and Development formally
approved the final draft of DSM-III. In June, it was approved by the Reference
Committee and the Board of Trustees.

BASIC CONCEPTS
Mental Disorder. Although this manual provides a classification of mental dis-
orders, there is no satisfactory definition that specifies precise boundaries for the
concept "mental disorder" (also true for such concepts as physical disorder and


6 Introduction

mental and physical health). Nevertheless, it is useful to present concepts that
have influenced the decision to include certain conditions in DSM-III as mental
disorders and to exclude others.
    In DSM-III each of the mental disorders is conceptualized as a clinically
significant behavioral or psychological syndrome or pattern that occurs in an
individual and that is typically associated with either a painful symptom (dis-
tress) or impairment in one or more important areas of functioning (disability).
In addition, there is an inference that there is a behavioral, psychological, or
biological dysfunction, and that the disturbance is not only in the relationship
between the individual and society. (When the disturbance is limited to a con-
flict between an individual and society, this may represent social deviance, which
may or may not be commendable, but is not by itself a mental disorder.)
    In DSM-III there is no assumption that each mental disorder is a discrete
entity with sharp boundaries (discontinuity) between it and other mental dis-
orders, as well as between it and No Mental Disorder. For example, there has
been a continuing controversy as to whether or not severe depressive disorder
and mild depressive disorder differ from each other qualitatively (discontinuity
between diagnostic entities) or quantitatively (a difference on a severity con-
tinuum). The inclusion of Major Depression With and Without Melancholia as
separate categories in DSM-III is justified by the clinical usefulness of the dis-
tinction. This does not imply a resolution of the controversy as to whether or not
these conditions are in fact quantitatively or qualitatively different.
    A common misconception is that a classification of mental disorders classi-
fies individuals, when actually what are being classified are disorders that
individuals have. For this reason, the text of DSM-III avoids the use of such
phrases as "a schizophrenic" or "an alcoholic," and instead uses the more
accurate, but admittedly more wordy "an individual with Schizophrenia" or "an
individual with Alcohol Dependence."
    Another misconception is that all individuals described as having the same
mental disorder are alike in all important ways. Although all the individuals
described as having the same mental disorder show at least the defining features
 of the disorder, they may well differ in other important ways that may affect
clinical management and outcome.

    Conditions Not Attributable to a Mental Disorder. In DSM-III it is recog-
nized that a behavioral or psychological problem may appropriately be a focus
of professional attention or treatment even though it is not attributable to a
mental disorder. A limited listing of codes, taken from the V codes section of
 ICD-9-CM, is provided for noting such problems.

    Descriptive Approach. For some of the mental disorders, the etiology or
 pathophysiological processes are known. For example, in the Organic Mental
 Disorders, organic factors necessary for the development of the disorders have
 been identified or are presumed. Another example is Adjustment Disorder, in
 which the disturbance is a reaction to psychosocial stress.
     For most of the DSM-III disorders, however, the etiology is unknown. A
 variety of theories have been advanced, buttressed by evidence—not always


                                                     Introduction 7

convincing—to explain how these disorders come about. The approach taken in
DSM-III is atheoretical with regard to etiology or pathophysiological process
except for those disorders for which this is well established and therefore in-
cluded in the definition of the disorder. Undoubtedly, with time, some of the
disorders of unknown etiology will be found to have specific biological etiologies,
others to have specific psychological causes, and still others to result mainly from
a particular interplay of psychological, social and biological factors.
    The major justification for the generally atheoretical approach taken in
DSM-III with regard to etiology is that the inclusion of etiological theories would
be an obstacle to use of the manual by clinicians of varying theoretical orienta-
tions, since it would not be possible to present all reasonable etiological theories
for each disorder. For example, Phobic Disorders are believed by many to repre-
sent a displacement of anxiety resulting from the breakdown of defensive opera-
tions for keeping internal conflict out of consciousness. Other investigators
explain phobias on the basis of learned avoidance responses to conditioned
anxiety. Still others believe that certain phobias result from a dysregulation of
basic biological systems mediating separation anxiety. In any case, as the field
trials have demonstrated, clinicians can agree on the identification of mental
disorders on the basis of their clinical manifestations without agreeing on how
the disturbances come about.
    Because DSM-III is generally atheoretical with regard to etiology, it at-
tempts to describe comprehensively what the manifestations of the mental dis-
orders are, and only rarely attempts to account for how the disturbances come
about, unless the mechanism is included in the definition of the disorder. This
approach can be said to be "descriptive" in that the definitions of the disorders
generally consist of descriptions of the clinical features of the disorders. These
features are described at the lowest order of inference necessary to describe the
characteristic features of the disorder. Frequently the order of inference is rela-
tively low, and the characteristic features consist of easily identifiable behavioral
signs or symptoms, such as disorientation, mood disturbance, or psychomotor
agitation. For some disorders, however, particularly the Personality Disorders, a
much higher order of inference is necessary. For example, one of the criteria for
Borderline Personality Disorder is "identity disturbance manifested by uncer-
tainty about several issues relating to identity, such as self-image, gender iden-
tity, long-term goals or career choice, friendship patterns, values and loyalties."
    This descriptive approach is also used in the division of the mental disorders
into diagnostic classes. All of the disorders without known etiology or patho-
physiological process are grouped together on the basis of shared clinical features.
    The subdivision of each diagnostic class into specific disorders, with even
further subdivision in some cases, reflects the best judgment of the Task Force
and its Advisory Committees that such subdivision will be useful. In this regard
we have been guided by the judgments of those clinicians who will be making
most use of each portion of the classification. For example, the subdivision of
Psychosexual Dysfunctions into seven specific disorders is in response to the ex-
pressed needs of clinicians who specialize in the treatment of these conditions.
(It soon became apparent that the criticism that a subdivision in a particular
area of the classification was useless always came from clinicians who specialized


8 Introduction

in other areas.) It should be noted, however, that the judgments of clinicians con-
cerning the necessity for including new categories were not accepted uncritically.
Although initially many new categories were added in an effort to be inclusive,
experience in the field trials and lack of validity evidence from the literature re-
sulted in the elimination of several proposed categories.

    Diagnostic Criteria. Since in DSM-I, DSM-II, and ICD-9 explicit criteria
are not provided, the clinician is largely on his or her own in defining the
content and boundaries of the diagnostic categories. In contrast, DSM-III pro-
vides specific diagnostic criteria as guides for making each diagnosis since
such criteria enhance interjudge diagnostic reliability. It should be understood,
however, that for most of the categories the diagnostic criteria are based on
clinical judgment, and have not yet been fully validated by data about such
important correlates as clinical course, outcome, family history, and treatment
response. Undoubtedly, with further study the criteria for many of the categories
will be revised.

    Multiaxial Evaluation. DSM-III recommends the use of a multiaxial system
for evaluation to ensure that certain information that may be of value in plan-
ning treatment and predicting outcome for each individual is recorded on each
of five axes, the first three of which constitute an official diagnostic evaluation.
    Axes I and II include all of the mental disorders. (Two classes of mental
disorders, Personality Disorders and Specific Developmental Disorders, are as-
signed to Axis II, whereas all of the other mental disorders are assigned to Axis
I. The reason for this is discussed on p. 23. This does not imply that these Axis II
disorders are not mental disorders.)
    Axis III is for physical disorders and conditions. The separation of this axis
from the mental disorders axes, is based on the tradition of separating those
disorders whose manifestations are primarily behavioral or psychological (i.e.,
mental disorders) from those whose manifestations are not. It is necessary to
have a term that can be applied to all of the disorders that are not considered
"mental disorders." The phrase "organic disorder" would incorrectly imply the
absence of physical factors in "mental" disorders. Hence, this manual uses the
term "physical disorder," recognizing that the boundaries for these two classes
of disorders ("mental" and "physical" disorders) change as our understanding
of the pathophysiology of these disorders increases.
    Axis IV, Severity of Psychosocial Stressors and Axis V, Highest Level of
Adaptive Functioning Past Year, are for use in special clinical or research settings
and provide information additional to the official DSM-III diagnoses (Axes I, II,
and III) that is of value for treatment planning and predicting outcome.

    Hierarchical Organization of Diagnostic Classes. In some mental disorders,
for example, Organic Mental Disorders, there is a wide range of signs and
symptoms. In others, such as Anxiety Disorders, only a limited range of signs
and symptoms is seen. For this reason, the order in which diagnostic classes are
listed represents, to some extent, a hierarchy in which a disorder high in the
hierarchy may have features found in disorders lower in the hierarchy, but


                                                      Introduction 9

 not the reverse. This hierarchical relationship makes it possible to present the
 differential diagnosis of major symptom areas in a series of decision trees (see
 Appendix A).
     Systematic Description. The text of DSM-III systematically describes each
 disorder in terms of current knowledge in the following areas: essential features,
 associated features, age at onset, course, impairment, complications, predisposing
 factors, prevalence, sex ratio, familial pattern, and differential diagnosis. Al-
 though descriptively comprehensive, DSM-III is not a textbook, since it does
 not include information about theories of etiology, management and treatment.
 It should also be noted that the DSM-III classification of mental disorders does
 not attempt to classify disturbed dyadic, family, or other interpersonal relation-
 ships.

     Glossary of Technical Terms. Technical terms used in the text for describing
 the disorders are defined in a glossary in Appendix B.

    Annotated Comparative Listing of DSM-II and DSM-III. The profession is
 entitled to know the rationale for all of the major changes that have resulted in
 the DSM-III classification of mental disorders. For this reason, included in
 Appendix C is a table containing an explanation for each major change made
 and new category added, with references from the scientific literature. With the
 use of this table, the reader can more easily make the transition from the DSM-II
 to the DSM-III classification and understand the reasons for the changes.

 NEUROTIC DISORDERS
Throughout the development of DSM-III the omission of the DSM-II diagnostic
class of Neuroses has been a matter of great concern to many clinicians, and
requires an explanation.
    When Freud first used the term "psychoneurosis," he was referring to only
four subtypes: anxiety neurosis, anxiety hysteria (phobia), obsessive compulsive
neurosis, and hysteria. Freud used the term both descriptively (to indicate a
painful symptom in an individual with intact reality testing) and to indicate the
etiological process (unconscious conflict arousing anxiety and leading to the mal-
adaptive use of defensive mechanisms that result in symptom formation).
    At the present time, however, there is no consensus in our field as to how
to define "neurosis." Some clinicians limit the term to its descriptive meaning
whereas others also include the concept of a specific etiological process. To avoid
ambiguity, the term neurotic disorder should be used only descriptively. This is
consistent with the use of this term in ICD-9. The term neurotic process, on the
other hand, should be used when the clinician wishes to indicate the concept of
a specific etiological process involving the following sequence: unconscious con-
flicts between opposing wishes or between wishes and prohibitions, which
causes unconscious perception of anticipated danger or dysphoria, which leads
to use of defense mechanisms that result in either symptoms, personality dis-
turbance, or both.
    The term neurotic disorder thus refers to a mental disorder in which the
predominant disturbance is a symptom or group of symptoms that is distressing


10 Introduction

to the individual and is recognized by him or her as unacceptable and alien
(ego-dystonic); reality testing is grossly intact; behavior does not actively violate
gross social norms (although functioning may be markedly impaired); the dis-
turbance is relatively enduring or recurrent without treatment and is not limited
to a transitory reaction to stressors; and there is no demonstrable organic etiology
or factor.
   Although many psychodynamically-oriented clinicians believe that the
neurotic process always plays a central role in the development of neurotic
disorders, there are other theories about how these disorders develop. For ex-
ample, there are social learning, cognitive, behavioral, and biological models that
attempt to explain the development of various neurotic disorders.
   Thus, the term neurotic disorder is used in DSM-III without any impli-
cation of a special etiological process. Neurotic disorder, defined descriptively, is
roughly equivalent to the psychoanalytic concept of "symptom neurosis." (This
is distinguished from "character neurosis" which is roughly equivalent to the
DSM-III concept of Personality Disorder. According to modern psychoanalytic
theory, the neurotic process is involved in the development of both symptom
neuroses and character neuroses.)
    In DSM-III the Neurotic Disorders are included in Affective, Anxiety,
Somatoform, Dissociative, and Psychosexual Disorders. These diagnostic classes
are listed together in the DSM-III classification to facilitate the location of
Neurotic Disorders. Preceding the listing of the class of Affective Disorders is
a statement indicating that Neurotic Disorders are included in these five DSM-
III classes.
    It should be noted that the ICD-9 category Neurotic Disorders, also defined
descriptively, includes only those categories that historically have been included
as "neuroses" in previous standard classifications. These previous classifications
did not contain some of the DSM-III categories, such as Psychosexual Disorders,
that unquestionably include some disorders falling within the concept of
Neurotic Disorders.
    Alternative approaches to the issue of the relationship of Neurotic Dis-
orders to the DSM-III classification were considered. If the DSM-III classification
had included a category of Neurotic Disorders that was limited to those dis-
orders included in the ICD-9 category, the potential value of the term Neurotic
Disorder would have been limited by a lack of adherence to its descriptive
meaning. On the other hand, to have grouped together all of the specific DSM-
III categories that are usually considered to be Neurotic Disorders would have
required separating some Affective Disorders from the other Affective Dis-
orders, some Psychosexual Disorders from the other Psychosexual Disorders,
and some Dissociative Disorders from other members of that class. The possible
advantages of this approach seemed to be far outweighed by the disadvantage
of fragmenting several diagnostic classes. Similarly, it was judged unwise to
group all psychotic disorders together, as is done in ICD-9.

USING DSM-III
    The major justification for the generally atheoretical approach taken in
Several features are included that can help the user become adept at making


                                                    Introduction 11

optimal use of the manual. By examining the listing of Axis I and Axis II diag-
noses and conditions contained in Chapter 1, the user can become familiar with
the organization of the classification into major and minor diagnostic classes.
 By studying Chapter 2, The Use of This Manual, the reader will learn how to
 use the multiaxial system, record principal and secondary diagnoses, indicate
 various levels of diagnostic certainty, and use the diagnostic criteria as guides
in making diagnoses. Chapter 3 contains the text and criteria for all of the
 diagnostic categories. The user will want to pay particular attention to those
 sections that are most appropriate to the kind of clinical or research work that
 he or she does.
     In making a DSM-III diagnosis the clinician may find it more convenient
to consult the Quick Reference to the Diagnostic Criteria from DSM-III,
 (Mini-D), a pocket-sized booklet sold separately, that contains only the classifica-
 tion, the diagnostic criteria, a listing of the most important conditions to be
 considered in a differential diagnosis of each category, and an index. It should be
noted that the index in both this book and the Quick Reference can be used
 when the clinician is in doubt about the DSM-III term that corresponds to a
 DSM-II term or to the name of some other widely used diagnostic category.

 EVALUATION FOR TREATMENT PLANNING
 Making a DSM-III diagnosis represents an initial step in a comprehensive
 evaluation leading to the formulation of a treatment plan. Additional informa-
 tion about the individual being evaluated beyond that required to make a DSM-
 III diagnosis will invariably be necessary.
     For instance, the clinician considering a psychodynamically-oriented treat-
 ment will pay particular attention to the nature of the interaction of the patient
 with the clinician during the interview, focusing on the particular way the patient
 molds and distorts the interview situation in order to make it conform to his or
 her deeply ingrained (usually unconscious) fantasies, attitudes, and expecta-
 tions about interpersonal relationships. The nature of these transference phe-
 nomena will be noted in order to predict future behavior in the treatment
 setting and to shed light on the patient's early developmental experiences
 and the conflicts that underlie the current disturbance. The clinician will note
 the patient's ability to reflect upon feelings and fantasies as they are being
 experienced. The clinician will also monitor his or her own responses to the
 patient as an indicator of the patient's unconscious conflicts and defensive style.
 Finally, the clinician will make a psychodynamic diagnostic formulation that is
 an explanation of the patient's psychopathology in terms of the nature of the
 unconscious conflicts and defense mechanisms, and the origins of the current
 behavior in early life experience.
    The clinician considering behavior therapy will do a functional analysis of
 the behavior disturbance. This begins by defining the problem behavior as
 objectively as possible in terms of developmental history and present ante-
cedents and consequences. These may be external (environmental, social) or
internal (affects, cognitions). When appropriate, attention will be paid to the
 patient's idiosyncratic thinking patterns (cognitions) and unfounded beliefs


 12 Introduction

about himself or herself and his or her relationship to others (schemata) which
may contribute to the onset or maintenance of the problem behavior. The
frequency of the problem behavior and the circumstances under which it
occurs are monitored during the behavioral analysis and as treatment progresses.
The functional analysis leads to the formulation of a set of hypotheses concern-
ing the acquisition and maintenance of the problem behavior, which is then
tested by the application of a specific behavioral treatment.
    A clinician considering family therapy will need information about how the
presenting problem affects the "identified patient" and the other family members
as individuals and as a social unit, how the family members relate to each
other, and how they could more effectively provide mutual support in dealing
with current and future problems. In addition, the clinician will want to know
how the family fits into the broader social network, which includes the therapist
 and other health-care providers, and how the family can make most effective
use of these resources.
    The clinician considering somatic therapy will pay particular attention to
how any abnormalities detected during a medical examination will affect the
choice of a somatic therapy. If the patient is currently on a psychoactive medi-
 cation and is not responding satisfactorily, it may be useful to clarify the
diagnosis and treatment needs of the patient by observing the patient without
medication, making sure that this is done in circumstances that protect the
patient's welfare. The patient's response to previous somatic therapy and its
adequacy in terms of choice, dosage, and duration will be reviewed. The patient's
 attitude toward somatic treatment will be explored; and when necessary, an
attempt will be made to relieve unrealistic anxieties about such treatment.

CAUTIONS
The purpose of DSM-III is to provide clear descriptions of diagnostic categories
in order to enable clinicians and investigators to diagnose, communicate about,
 study, and treat various mental disorders. The use of this manual for non-
 clinical purposes, such as determination of legal responsibility, competency or
insanity, or justification for third-party payment, must be critically examined
in each instance within the appropriate institutional context.

 THE FUTURE
 In the several years that it has taken to develop DSM-III, there have been
 several instances when major changes in initial drafts were necessary because
 of new findings. Thus, this final version of DSM-III is only one still frame in
 the ongoing process of attempting to better understand mental disorders.


             Chapter One


The DSM-III Classification


This page intentionally left blank 


    DSM-III CLASSIFICATION: AXES I AND II CATEGORIES AND CODES

 All official DSM-III codes and terms are      313.23 Elective mutism
 included in ICD-9-CM. However, in             313.81 Oppositional disorder
 order to differentiate those DSM-III          313.82 Identity disorder
 categories that use the same ICD-9-CM
 codes, unofficial non-ICD-9-CM codes
                                               Eating disorders
 are provided in parentheses for use
 when greater specificity is necessary.        307.10 Anorexia nervosa
                                               307.51 Bulimia
 The long dashes indicate the need for a       307.52 Pica
 fifth-digit subtype or other qualifying       307.53 Rumination disorder of
 term.                                                 infancy
                                               307.50 Atypical eating disorder
 DISORDERS USUALLY FIRST
 EVIDENT IN INFANCY, CHILD-                    Stereotyped movement disorders
 HOOD OR ADOLESCENCE                           307.21 Transient tic disorder
 Mental retardation                            307.22 Chronic motor tic disorder
 (Code in fifth digit: 1 = with other be-      307.23 Tourette's disorder
 havioral symptoms [requiring attention        307.20 Atypical tic disorder
 or treatment and that are not part of         307.30 Atypical stereotyped movement
 another disorder], 0 = without other                  disorder
 behavioral symptoms.)
 317.0(x) Mild mental retardation,
 318.0(x) Moderate mental retarda-            Other disorders with physical
         tion,                                manifestations
 318.1(x) Severe mental retarda-              307.00 Stuttering
         tion,                                307.60 Functional enuresis
 318.2(x) Profound mental retarda-            307.70 Functional encopresis
         tion,                                307.46 Sleepwalking disorder
 319.0(x) Unspecified mental retarda-         307.46 Sleep terror disorder (307.49)
         tion,

 Attention deficit disorder                   Pervasive developmental disorders
 314.01 with hyperactivity                    Code in fifth digit: 0 = full syndrome
 314.00 without hyperactivity                 present, 1 = residual- state.
 314.80 residual type                         299.Ox Infantile autism,
                                              299.9x Childhood onset pervasive
                                                       developmental disorder,
 Conduct disorder
 312.00 undersocialized, aggressive
                                              299.8x Atypical,
 312.10 undersocialized, nonaggressive
 312.23 socialized, aggressive
 312.21 socialized, nonaggressive
 312.90 atypical                                 Specific developmental disorders
                                                 Note: These are coded on Axis II.
Anxiety disorders of childhood or                315.00 Developmental reading
adolescence                                               disorder
 309.21 Separation anxiety disorder              315.10 Developmental arithmetic
 313.21 Avoidant disorder of childhood                    disorder
         or adolescence                          315.31 Developmental language
313.00 Overanxious disorder                               disorder
                                                 315.39 Developmental articula-
Other disorders of infancy, childhood or                  tion disorder
adolescence                                      315.50 Mixed specific develop-
313.89 Reactive attachment disorder                       mental disorder
         of infancy                              315.90 Atypical specific develop-
313.22 Schizoid disorder of childhood                     mental disorder
         or adolescence

                                          15


16 DSM-III Classification

ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS                      292.11 delusional disorder (327.35)
Section 1. Organic mental disorders           292.00 withdrawal (327.31)
whose etiology or pathophysiological
process is listed below (taken from the             Phencyclidine (PCP) or similarly
mental disorders section of ICD-9-CM).              acting arylcyclohexylamine
                                              305.90 intoxication (327.40)
Dementias arising in the senium and           292.81 delirium (327.42)
presenium                                     292.90 mixed organic mental disorder
                                                       (327.49)
      Primary degenerative dementia,
      senile onset,                                 Hallucinogen
290.30 with delirium                          305.30 hallucinosis (327.56)
290.20 with delusions                         292.11 delusional disorder (327.55)
290.21 with depression                        292.84 affective disorder (327.57)
290.00 uncomplicated
Code in fifth digit:                                Cannabis
1 = with delirium, 2 = with delusions,        305.20 intoxication (327.60)
3 = with depression, 0 =. uncompli-           292.11 delusional disorder (327.65)
cated.
290.1x Primary degenerative dementia,               Tobacco
         presenile onset,                     292.00 withdrawal (327.71)
290.4x Multi-infarct dementia,
                                                    Caffeine
Substance-induced
                                              305.90 intoxication (327.80)
      Alcohol
                                                    Other or unspecified substance
303.00 intoxication                           305.90 intoxication (327.90)
291.40 idiosyncratic intoxication             292.00 withdrawal (327.91)
291.80 withdrawal                             292.81 delirium (327.92)
291.00 withdrawal delirium                    292.82 dementia (327.93)
291.30 hallucinosis                           292.83 amnestic disorder (327.94)
291.10 amnestic disorder                      292.11 delusional disorder (327.95)
Code severity of dementia in fifth digit:     292.12 hallucinosis (327.96)
1 = mild, 2 = moderate, 3 = severe,           292.84 affective disorder (327.97)
0 = unspecified.                              292.89 personality disorder (327.98)
291.2x Dementia associated with               292.90 atypical or mixed organic
         alcoholism,                                   mental disorder (327.99)

      Barbiturate or similarly acting
      sedative or hypnotic
305.40 intoxication (327.00)                  Section 2. Organic brain syndromes
292.00 withdrawal (327.01)                    whose etiology or pathophysiological
292.00 withdrawal delirium (327.02)           process is either noted as an additional
292.83 amnestic disorder (327.04)             diagnosis from outside the mental
                                              disorders section of ICD-9-CM or is
      Opioid                                  unknown.
305.50 intoxication (327.10)
292.00 withdrawal (327.11)                    293.00 Delirium
                                              294.10 Dementia
      Cocaine                                 294.00 Amnestic syndrome
 305.60 intoxication (327.20)                 293.81 Organic delusional syndrome
                                              293.82 Organic hallucinosis
      Amphetamine or similarly acting         293.83 Organic affective syndrome
      sympathomimetic                         310.10 Organic personality syndrome
 305.70 intoxication (327.30)                 294.80 Atypical or mixed organic
 292.81 delirium (327.32)                              brain syndrome


                                                         DSM-II I Classification 17

SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS                       PARANOID DISORDERS
Code in fifth digit: 1 = continuous,          297.10 Paranoia
2 = episodic, 3 = in remission, 0 =           297.30 Shared paranoid disorder
unspecified.                                  298.30 Acute paranoid disorder
                                              297.90 Atypical paranoid disorder
305.0x Alcohol abuse,
303.9x Alcohol dependence                     PSYCHOTIC DISORDERS NOT
         (Alcoholism),                        ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
305.4x Barbiturate or similarly acting
         sedative or hypnotic abuse,          295.40 Schizophreniform disorder
304.1x Barbiturate or similarly acting        298.80 Brief reactive psychosis
         sedative or hypnotic de-             295.70 Schizoaffective disorder
         pendence,                            298.90 Atypical psychosis
305.5x Opioid abuse,
304.Ox Opioid dependence,                     NEUROTIC DISORDERS: These are in-
305.6x Cocaine abuse,                         cluded in Affective, Anxiety, Somato-
305.7x Amphetamine or similarly               form, Dissociative, and Psychosexual
         acting sympathomimetic               Disorders. In order to facilitate the
         abuse,                               identification of the categories that in
304.4x Amphetamine or similarly               DSM-II were grouped together in the
         acting sympathomimetic               class of Neuroses, the DSM-II terms are
         dependence,                          included separately in parentheses
305.9x Phencyclidine (PCP) or similarly       after the corresponding categories.
         acting arylcyclohexylamine           These DSM-II terms are included in ICD-
         abuse, (328.4x)                      9-CM and therefore are acceptable as
305.3x Hallucinogen abuse,                    alternatives to the recommended DSM-
305.2x Cannabis abuse,                        III terms that precede them.
304.3x Cannabis dependence,
305.1x Tobacco dependence,                    AFFECTIVE DISORDERS
305.9x Other, mixed or unspecified            Major affective disorders
         substance abuse,
304.6x Other specified substance              Code major depressive episode in fifth
         dependence,                          digit: 6 = in remission, 4 = with
304.9x Unspecified substance                  psychotic features (the unofficial non-
         dependence,                          ICD-9-CM fifth digit 7 may be used
304.7x Dependence on combination              instead to indicate that the psychotic
         of opioid and other non-             features are mood-incongruent), 3 =
         alcoholic substance,                 with melancholia, 2 — without melan-
304.8x Dependence on combination of           cholia, 0 = unspecified.
         substances, excluding opioids
         and alcohol,                         Code manic episode in fifth digit:
                                              6 = in remission, 4 = with psychotic
                                              features (the unofficial non-ICD-9-CM
SCHIZOPHRENIC DISORDERS
                                              fifth digit 7 may be used instead to indi-
Code in fifth digit: 1 = subchronic,          cate that the psychotic features are
2 =: chronic, 3 = subchronic with acute       mood-incongruent), 2 = without psy-
exacerbation, 4 — chronic with acute          chotic features, 0 = unspecified.
exacerbation, 5 = in remission, 0 =
unspecified.                                        Bipolar disorder,
                                              296.6x mixed,
      Schizophrenia,                          296.4x manic,
295.1x disorganized,                          296.5x depressed,
295.2x catatonic,
295.3x paranoid,                                    Major depression,
295.9x undifferentiated,                      296.2x single episode, -
295.6x residual,                              296.3x recurrent,


18 DSM-III Classification

Other specific affective disorders            302.5x Transsexualism,
301.13 Cyclothymic disorder                  302.60 Gender identity disorder of
300.40 Dysthymic disorder                             childhood
         (or Depressive neurosis)             302.85 Atypical gender identity dis-
                                                      order
Atypical affective disorders
296.70 Atypical bipolar disorder
296.82 Atypical depression                    Paraphilias

ANXIETY DISORDERS                             302.81 Fetishism
                                              302.30 Transvestism
      Phobic disorders (or Phobic             302.10 Zoophilia
      neuroses)                               302.20 Pedophilia
300.21 Agoraphobia with panic attacks         302.40 Exhibitionism
300.22 Agoraphobia without panic
                                              302.82 Voyeurism
         attacks
                                              302.83 Sexual masochism
300.23 Social phobia
                                              302.84 Sexual sadism
300.29 Simple phobia
                                              302.90 Atypical paraphilia
      Anxiety states (or Anxiety
      neuroses)                               Psychosexual dysfunctions
300.01 Panic disorder
300.02 Generalized anxiety disorder           302.71 Inhibited sexual desire
300.30 Obsessive compulsive disorder          302.72 Inhibited sexual excitement
         (or Obsessive compulsive             302.73 Inhibited female orgasm
         neurosis)                            302.74 Inhibited male orgasm
      Post-traumatic stress disorder          302.75 Premature ejaculation
308.30 acute                                  302.76 Functional dyspareunia
309.81 chronic or delayed                     306.51 Functional vaginismus
300.00 Atypical anxiety disorder              302.70 Atypical psychosexual dysfunc-
                                                      tion
SOMATOFORM DISORDERS
300.81 Somatization disorder
300.11 Conversion disorder                    Other psychosexual disorders
         (or Hysterical neurosis, con-        302.00 Ego-dystonic homosexuality
         version type)                        302.89 Psychosexual disorder not
307.80 Psychogenic pain disorder                       elsewhere classified
300.70 Hypochondriasis
         (or Hypochondriacal neurosis)
                                              FACTITIOUS DISORDERS
300.70 Atypical somatoform disorder
         (300.71)                             300.16 Factitious disorder with
                                                       psychological symptoms
DISSOCIATIVE DISORDERS
(OR HYSTERICAL NEUROSES,                      301.51 Chronic factitious disorder
DISSOCIATIVE TYPE)                                     with physical symptoms
300.12 Psychogenic amnesia                    300.19 Atypical factitious disorder
300.13 Psychogenic fugue                               with physical symptoms
300.14 Multiple personality
300.60 Depersonalization disorder             DISORDERS OF IMPULSE CONTROL
         (or Depersonalization neurosis)      NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
300.15 Atypical dissociative disorder         312.31 Pathological gambling
PSYCHOSEXUAL DISORDERS                        312.32 Kleptomania
Gender identity disorders                     312.33 Pyromania
 Indicate sexual history in the fifth digit   312.34 Intermittent explosive disorder
of Transsexualism code: 1 = asexual,          312.35 Isolated explosive disorder
2 = homosexual, 3 = heterosexual,             312.39 Atypical impulse control dis-
0 — unspecified.                                       order


                                                        DSM-III Classification 19

ADJUSTMENT DISORDER                          V CODES FOR CONDITIONS NOT
309.00 with depressed mood                   ATTRIBUTABLE TO A MENTAL
309.24 with anxious mood                     DISORDER THAT ARE A FOCUS
309.28 with mixed emotional features         OF ATTENTION OR TREATMENT
309.30 with disturbance of conduct           V65.20 Malingering
309.40 with mixed disturbance of             V62.89 Borderline intellectual
        emotions and conduct                           functioning (V62.88)
309.23 with work (or academic)               V71.01 Adult antisocial behavior
        inhibition                           V71.02 Childhood or adolescent
309.83 with withdrawal                                 antisocial behavior
309.90 with atypical features                V62.30 Academic problem
                                             V62.20 Occupational problem
                                             V62.82 Uncomplicated bereavement
PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS                        V15.81 Noncompliance with medical
AFFECTING PHYSICAL CONDITION                           treatment
Specify physical condition on Axis III.      V62.89 Phase of life problem or other
316.00 Psychological factors affecting                 life circumstance problem
        physical condition                   V61.10 Marital problem
                                             V61.20 Parent-child problem
                                             V61.80 Other specified family circum-
                                                       stances
   PERSONALITY DISORDERS
                                             V62.81 Other interpersonal problem
   Note: These are coded on Axis II.
   301.00 Paranoid                           ADDITIONAL CODES
   301.20 Schizoid                           300.90 Unspecified mental disorder
   301.22 Schizotypal                                 (nonpsychotic)
   301.50 Histrionic                         V71.09 No diagnosis or condition on
   301.81 Narcissistic                                 Axis I
   301.70 Antisocial                         799.90 Diagnosis or condition deferred
   301.83 Borderline                                  on Axis I
   301.82 Avoidant
   301.60 Dependent
   301.40 Compulsive
   301.84 Passive-Aggressive                    V71.09 No diagnosis on Axis II
   301.89 Atypical, mixed or other              799.90 Diagnosis deferred on
           personality disorder                          Axis II


This page intentionally left blank 


       Chapter Two


Use of This Manual


This page intentionally left blank 


                            Use of This Manual


MULTIAXIAL EVALUATION
A multiaxial evaluation requires that every case be assessed on each of several
"axes," each of which refers to a different class of information. In order for the
system to have maximal clinical usefulness, there must be a limited number of
axes; there are five in the DSM-III multiaxial classification. The first three axes
constitute the official diagnostic assessment.
    Each individual is evaluated on each of these axes:
    Axis I Clinical Syndromes
               Conditions Not Attributable to a Mental Disorder That Are a
                 Focus of Attention or Treatment
               Additional Codes
    Axis II Personality Disorders
               Specific Developmental Disorders
    Axis III Physical Disorders and Conditions
    Axes IV and V are available for use in special clinical and research settings
and provide information supplementing the official DSM-III diagnoses (Axes I,
II, and III) that may be useful for planning treatment and predicting outcome:
    Axis IV Severity of Psychosocial Stressors
    Axis V Highest Level of Adaptive Functioning Past Year
  Use of the DSM-III multiaxial classification ensures that attention is given to
certain types of disorders, aspects of the environment, and areas of functioning
that might be overlooked if the focus were on assessing a single presenting
problem.

Axes I and II
Axes I and II comprise the entire classification of mental disorders plus Condi-
tions Not Attributable to a Mental Disorder That Are a Focus of Attention or
Treatment. The disorders listed on Axis II are the Personality Disorders (for
adults and, in some cases, for children and adolescents) and the Specific Devel-
opmental Disorders (for children and adolescents and, in some cases, for adults).
The remaining disorders and conditions are included in Axis I. This separation
ensures that consideration is given to the possible presence of disorders that are
frequently overlooked when attention is directed to the usually more florid Axis I
disorder.
    In some instances an individual may have a disorder on both axes. For exam-

                                 23


24 Use of This Manual

pie, an adult may have Major Depression noted on Axis I and Compulsive Per-
sonality Disorder on Axis II, or a child may have Conduct Disorder noted on
 Axis I and Developmental Language Disorder on Axis II. In other instances there
may be no disorder on Axis I, the reason for seeking treatment being limited to
 a condition noted on Axis II. In this latter case, the clinician should write: Axis I:
V71.09 No diagnosis or condition on Axis I. On the other hand, if a disorder is
noted on Axis I but there is no evidence of an Axis II disorder, the clinician
 should write: Axis II: V71.09 No diagnosis on Axis II, or one of the Conditions
 Not Attributable to a Mental Disorder should be recorded.

 Multiple diagnoses within Axes I and II
 On both Axes I and II, multiple diagnoses should be made when necessary to
 describe the current condition. This applies particularly to Axis I, in which, for
 example, an individual may have both a Substance Use Disorder and an Affec-
 tive Disorder. It is possible to have multiple diagnoses within the same class.
 For example, it is possible to have several Substance Use Disorders or, in the
 class of Affective Disorders, it is possible to have Major Depression superim-
 posed on Dysthymic Disorder or Bipolar Disorder superimposed on Cyclothymic
 Disorder. In other classes, such as Schizophrenic Disorders, however, each of the
 subtypes is mutually exclusive.
     Within Axis II, the diagnosis of multiple Specific Developmental Disorders
 is common. For some adults the persistence of a Specific Developmental Disorder
 and the presence of a Personality Disorder may require that both be noted on
 Axis II. Usually, a single Personality Disorder will be noted; but when the indi-
 vidual meets the criteria for more than one, all should be recorded.

 Axis II and description of personality features
 Axis II can be used to indicate specific personality traits when no Personality
 Disorder exists. For example, compulsive traits can be recorded on Axis II for
 an individual for whom Major Depression is noted on Axis I. Even when a Per-
 sonality Disorder is noted on Axis II, the clinician may wish to indicate other
 personality characteristics—e.g., paranoid traits can be noted on Axis II for an
 individual who is also described as having Compulsive Personality Disorder on
 this same axis. (Code numbers should not be used when personality traits are
 noted, since a code number indicates a Personality Disorder.)

 Principal diagnosis
 When an individual receives more than one diagnosis, the principal diagnosis is
 the condition that was chiefly responsible for occasioning the evaluation or ad-
 mission to clinical care. In most cases this condition will be the main focus of
 attention or treatment. The principal diagnosis may be an Axis I or an Axis II
 diagnosis; but when an Axis II diagnosis is the principal diagnosis the notation
 should be followed by the phrase "(Principal diagnosis)."
     Example: Axis I: 303.93 Alcohol Dependence, In Remission
              Axis II: 301.70 Antisocial Personality Disorder (Principal
                                diagnosis)


                                             Use of This Manual 25

When an individual has both an Axis I and an Axis II diagnosis, the principal
diagnosis will be assumed to be on Axis I unless the Axis II diagnosis is followed
by the qualifying phrase "(Principal diagnosis)."
   When multiple diagnoses are made on either Axis I or Axis II, they should
be listed within each axis in the order of focus of attention or treatment. For
example, if an individual with Schizophrenia, Paranoid Type, Chronic, comes to
an emergency room for treatment of Alcohol Intoxication, the diagnosis should
be listed:
    Axis I: 303.00 Alcohol Intoxication
              295.32 Schizophrenia, Paranoid Type, Chronic

Provisional diagnosis
In some instances not enough information will be available to make a firm diag-
nosis. The clinician may wish to indicate a significant degree of diagnostic un-
certainty by writing "(Provisional)" following the diagnosis—e.g., Schizophreni-
form Disorder (Provisional, rule out Organic Delusional Syndrome).

Levels of diagnostic certainty
Frequently a diagnostic evaluation yields insufficient information to make a spe-
cific diagnosis. The following table indicates the various ways in which a clini-
cian may indicate diagnostic uncertainty:


           Term Examples of clinical situations

V Codes (for Conditions Not Insufficient information to know whether or
Attributable to a Mental Dis- not a presenting problem is attributable to
order That Are a Focus of At- a mental disorder, e.g., Academic Problem;
tention or Treatment) Adult Antisocial Behavior.

799.90 Diagnosis or Condi- Information inadequate to make any diag-
tion Deferred on Axis I nostic judgment about an Axis I diagnosis or
                             condition.

799.90 Diagnosis Deferred on Same for an Axis II diagnosis.
Axis II

300.90 Unspecified Mental Enough information available to rule out a
Disorder (non-psychotic) psychotic disorder, but further specification
                             is not possible.

298.90 Atypical Psychosis Enough information available to determine
                            the presence of a psychotic disorder, but
                            further specification is not possible.


26 Use of This Manual

            Term Examples of clinical situations
 Atypical (class of disorder) Enough information available to indicate
                             the class of disorder that is present, but
                             further specification is not possible, be-
                              cause either there is not sufficient informa-
                              tion to make a more specific diagnosis, or
                             the clinical features of the disorder do not
                              meet the criteria for any of the other cate-
                              gories, e.g., Atypical Affective Disorder.
 Specific diagnosis (Provisional) Enough information available to make a
                              "working" diagnosis, but the clinician wishes
                              to indicate a significant degree of diagnostic
                              uncertainty, e.g., Schizophreniform Disorder
                              (Provisional).
 Axis III. Physical Disorders or Conditions
 Axis III permits the clinician to indicate any current physical disorder or
 condition that is potentially relevant to the understanding or management of the
 individual. These are the conditions outside of the mental disorders section of
 ICD-9-CM. In some instances the condition may be etiologically significant (e.g.,
 a neurologic disorder associated with Dementia); in other instances the physical
 disorder may not be etiologic, but important in the overall management of the
 individual (e.g., diabetes in a child with a Conduct Disorder). In yet other in-
 stances, the clinician may wish to note significant associated physical findings,
 such as "soft neurological signs." Multiple diagnoses are permitted.
 Axis IV. Severity of Psychosocial Stressors
 Axis IV provides a coding of the overall severity of a stressor judged to have
 been a significant contributor to the development or exacerbation of the current
 disorder. An individual's prognosis may be better when a disorder develops as
 a consequence of a severe stressor than when it develops after no stressor or a
 minimal stressor.
     Rating the severity of the stressor. This rating should be based on the
 clinician's assessment of the stress an "average" person in similar circumstances
 and with similar sociocultural values would experience from the particular
 psychosocial stressor(s). This judgment involves consideration of the following:
 the amount of change in the individual's life caused by the stressor, the degree
 to which the event is desired and under the individual's control, and the num-
 ber of stressors. Even though a specific stressor may have greater impact on an
 individual who is especially vulnerable or has certain internal conflicts, the
 rating should be based on the severity of the stressor itself, not on the indi-
 vidual's vulnerability to the particular stressor. If a vulnerability to stress exists,
 it will frequently be due to a mental disorder that is coded on Axis I or II.
     In most instances the psychosocial stressor will have occurred within a year
 prior to the current disorder (Post-traumatic Stress Disorder is a notable excep-
 tion). In some instances the stressor is the anticipation of a future event: for
 example, the knowledge that one will soon retire. Although a stressor frequently


                                              Use of This Manual 27

 plays a precipitating role in a disorder, it may also be a consequence of the in-
 dividual's psychopathology—e.g., Alcohol Dependence may lead to marital prob-
 lems and divorce, which can then become stressors contributing to the develop-
 ment of a Major Depression. The current disorder that is related to the psycho-
 social stressor may be either a clinical syndrome, coded on Axis I, or an exacerba-
 tion of a Personality or Specific Developmental Disorder, coded on Axis II.
     In addition to the severity rating, in certain settings it may be useful to
 note the specific psychosocial stressor (e.g., chronic marital discord about shar-
 ing household duties). This information may be important in formulating a treat-
 ment plan that includes attempts to remove the psychosocial stressor or to help
 the individual cope with it. More than one psychosocial stressor may be judged
 etiologically significant by the clinician, but rarely will more than four be
 recorded. The stressors should be noted as specifically as possible and listed in
 order of their importance.
    The severity rating should reflect the summed effect of all of the psycho-
 social stressors that are listed. The following codes and terms may be used as
 guides in making the rating:

                                          Child or adolescent
   Code Term Adult examples                examples
     1 None        No apparent psychosocial No apparent psychosocial
                   stressor                stressor
     2 Minimal     Minor violation of the  Vacation with family
                   law; small bank loan
     3 Mild        Argument with neighbor; Change in schoolteacher;
                   change in work hours    new school year
     4 Moderate    New career; death of    Chronic parental fighting;
                   close friend; pregnancy change to new school;
                                           illness of close relative;
                                           birth of sibling
     5 Severe      Serious illness in self or Death of peer; divorce of
                   family; major financial parents; arrest; hospital-
                   loss; marital separation; ization; persistent and
                   birth of child          harsh parental discipline
    6 Extreme      Death of close relative; Death of parent or
                   divorce                sibling; repeated physical
                                          or sexual abuse
    7 Cata-        Concentration camp ex- Multiple family deaths
         strophic  perience; devastating
                   natural disaster
    0 Unspeci-     No information, or not  No information, or not
         fied      applicable             applicable

    Types of psychosocial stressors to be considered. To ascertain etiologically
significant psychosocial stressors, the following areas may be considered:


28 Use of This Manual

    Conjugal (marital and nonmarital): e.g., engagement, marriage, discord, separation,
death of spouse.
    Parenting: e.g., becoming a parent, friction with child, illness of child.
    Other interpersonal: problems with one's friends, neighbors, associates, or non-
conjugal family members, e.g., illness of best friend, discordant relationship with boss.
    Occupational: includes work, school, homemaker, e.g., unemployment, retirement,
school problems.
    Living circumstances: e.g., change in residence, threat to personal safety, immigra-
tion.
    Financial: e.g., inadequate finances, change in financial status.
    Legal: e.g., arrested, jailed, lawsuit or trial.
    Developmental: phases of the life cycle, e.g., puberty, transition to adult status,
menopause, "becoming 50."
    Physical illness or injury: e.g., illness, accident, surgery, abortion. (Note: A physi-
cal disorder is listed on Axis III whenever it is related to the development or manage-
ment of an Axis I or II disorder. A physical disorder can also be a psychosocial stressor
if its impact is due to its meaning to the individual, in which case it would be listed on
both Axis III and Axis IV.)
    Other psychosocial stressors: e.g., natural or manmade disaster, persecution, un-
wanted pregnancy, out-of-wedlock birth, rape.
    Family factors (children and adolescents): In addition to the above, for children
and adolescents the following stressors may be considered: cold or distant relationship
between parents; overtly hostile relationship between parents; physical or mental dis-
turbance in family members; cold or distant parental behavior toward child; overtly
hostile parental behavior toward child; parental intrusiveness; inconsistent parental
control; insufficient parental control; insufficient social or cognitive stimulation;
anomalous family situation, e.g., single parent, foster family; institutional rearing; loss
of nuclear family members.

Axis V. Highest Level of Adaptive Functioning Past Year
Axis V permits the clinician to indicate his or her judgment of an individual's
highest level of adaptive functioning (for at least a few months) during the past
year. This information frequently has prognostic significance, because usually an
individual returns to his or her previous level of adaptive functioning after an
episode of illness.
    As conceptualized here, adaptive functioning is a composite of three major
areas: social relations, occupational functioning, and use of leisure time. These
three areas are to be considered together, although there is evidence that social
relations should be given greater weight because of their particularly great prog-
nostic significance. An assessment of the use of leisure time will affect the over-
all judgment only when there is no significant impairment in social relations and
occupational functioning or when occupational opportunities are limited or
absent (e.g., the individual is retired or handicapped).

     Social relations include all relations with people, with particular emphasis
on family and friends. The breadth and quality of interpersonal relationships
should be considered.

     Occupational functioning refers to functioning as a worker, student, or
homemaker. The amount, complexity, and quality of the work accomplished


                                             Use of This Manual 29

should be considered. The highest levels of adaptive functioning should be used
only when high occupational productivity is not associated with a high level of
subjective discomfort.
    Use of leisure time includes recreational activities or hobbies. The range
and depth of involvement and the pleasure derived should be considered.
    The level noted should be descriptive of the individual's functioning regard-
less of whether or not special circumstances, such as concurrent treatment, may
have been necessary to sustain that level.

                                           Child or adolescent
 Levels               Adult examples       examples
 1 SUPERIOR—Unusu-    Single parent living in A 12-year-old girl gets
 ally effective func- deteriorating neigh- superior grades in school,
 tioning in social rela- borhood takes excel- is extremely popular
 tions, occupational  lent care of children among her peers, and
 functioning, and use and home, has        excels in many sports.
 of leisure time.     warm relations with  She does all of this with
                      friends, and finds time apparent ease and com-
                      for pursuit of hobby. fort.
 2 VERY GOOD—         A 65-year-old retired An adolescent boy gets
 Better than average  widower does some    excellent grades, works
 functioning in social volunteer work, often part-time, has several
 relations, occupational sees old friends, and close friends, and plays
 functioning, and use pursues hobbies.     banjo in a jazz band. He
 of leisure time.                          admits to some distress
                                           in "keeping up with
                                           everything."
 3 GOOD—No more       A woman with many    An 8-year-old boy does
 than slight impairment friends functions ex- well in school, has several
 in either social or oc- tremely well at a dif- friends, but bullies
 cupational functioning. ficult job, but says younger children.
                      "the strain is too
                      much."
 4 FAIR—Moderate im-  A lawyer has         A 10-year-old girl does
 pairment in either   trouble carrying     poorly in school, but has
 social relations or  through assignments; adequate peer and family
 occupational func-   has several acquaint- relations.
 tioning, or some im- ances, but hardly any
 pairment in both.    close friends.
 5 POOR—Marked im-    A man with one or two A 14-year-old boy almost
 pairment in either   friends has trouble  fails in school and has
 social relations or  keeping a job for more trouble getting along
 occupational function- than a few weeks.  with his peers.
 ing, or moderate
 impairment in both.


30 Use of This Manual

                                           Child or adolescent
 Levels               Adult examples       examples
 6 VERY POOR—         A woman is unable to A 6-year-old girls needs
 Marked impairment in do any of her house- special help in all subjects
 both social relations work and has violent and has virtually no peer
 and occupational func- outbursts toward   relationships.
 tioning.             family and neighbors.
 7 GROSSLY IMPAIRED   An elderly man needs A 4-year-old boy needs
 —Gross impairment    supervision to main- constant restraint to avoid
 in virtually all areas tain minimal personal hurting himself and is
 of functioning.      hygiene and is usually almost totally lacking in
                      incoherent           skills.
 0 UNSPECIFIED        No information.      No information.

Examples of How To Record the Results
of a DSM-III Multiaxial Evaluation

EXAMPLE I
        Axis I:    296.23 Major Depression, Single Episode, with
                            Melancholia
                   303.93 Alcohol Dependence, In Remission
        Axis II:   301.60 Dependent Personality Disorder (Provisional,
                            rule out Borderline Personality Disorder)
        Axis III:  Alcoholic cirrhosis of liver
        Axis IV:   Psychosocial stressors: anticipated retirement and change
                    in residence with loss of contact with friends
                   Severity: 4—Moderate
        Axis V:   Highest level of adaptive functioning past year: 3—Good

EXAMPLE 2
        Axis I:   304.03 Heroin Dependence, In Remission
        Axis II:  301.70 Antisocial Personality Disorder (Principal
                            diagnosis); prominent paranoid traits
        Axis III: None
        Axis IV:  Psychosocial stressors: No information
                  Severity: 0—Unspecified
        Axis V:   Highest level of adaptive functioning past year: 5—Poor

EXAMPLE 3
        Axis I:   295.92 Schizophrenia, Undifferentiated Type, Chronic
                  V62.89 Borderline Intellectual Functioning (Provisional)
       Axis II:   V71.08 No diagnosis on Axis II


                                             Use of This Manual 31

        Axis III: Late effects of viral encephalitis
        Axis IV: Psychosocial stressors: death of mother
                   Severity: 6—Extreme
        Axis V: Highest level of adaptive functioning past year: 6—
                     Very poor

DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
Diagnostic criteria appear at the end of the text describing each specific diag-
nosis.
    These criteria are offered as useful guides for making the diagnosis, since it
has been demonstrated that the use of such criteria enhances diagnostic agree-
ment among clinicians. It should be understood, however, that for most of the
categories the criteria are based on clinical judgment, and have not yet been
fully validated; with further experience and study, the criteria will, in many
cases, undoubtedly be revised.
    Designation by capital letters indicates multiple criteria the presence of all
of which constitutes the guide to making the diagnosis.

TYPES OF INFORMATION IN THE TEXT
In order to ensure consistency and comprehensiveness in the descriptions of the
disorders, information has been included under each of the following headings.
In some instances, when many of the specific disorders, such as Substance Use
Disorders, share common features, this information is included in the introduc-
tion to the entire section.
    The first paragraph states the essential features of the disorder. These are
the features that are generally required to make the diagnosis and that are
always present.

    Associated features. Features that are often, but not invariably, present.

    Age at onset. The age when the disorder usually becomes apparent.

    Course. The usual course or outcome of the disorder.

    Impairment. Conceptualized primarily as impairment in social and occupa-
tional functioning.

    Complications. Disorders or events (e.g., suicide) that may develop as a
result of the disorder. In some cases the distinction among complications, im-
pairment, and associated features is arbitrary.

    Predisposing factors. Characteristics of an individual that can be identified
before the development of the disorder and that place him or her at higher risk
for developing the disorder. Not included in this section are general societal or
environmental conditions (such as poverty) that may predispose all individuals
exposed to these conditions to develop the disorder.


32 Use of This Manual

    Prevalence. The prevalence of the disorder is often expressed as the propor-
tion of adults who at some time in their lives met the criteria for the disorder.
This method of presentation has the advantage of being readily understandable,
but it is highly dependent on the age at onset and the relative proportion of in-
dividuals in the population who have reached that age. The data are often pre-
sented as a range, based on more than a single study.
    When data from epidemiological studies are not available, the prevalence
is stated in general terms preceded by the word "apparently" to indicate that the
judgment is based on clinical experience. The term "apparently rare" is applied
to disorders that may not be seen by a clinician in many years of practice.

    Sex ratio. The relative frequency with which the disorder is diagnosed in
men and women.

    Familial pattern. Indication of whether the disorder is more common among
biologically related family members than in the general population. When this
is the case, it does not necessarily indicate a genetic mechanism. Unless positive
information has been replicated in several studies, "No information" is noted.

    Differential diagnosis. Disorders that should be distinguished from the one
being presented are discussed, generally in the order in which they appear in the
classification.

EXPLANATION OF TERMS AND CONVENTIONS
    Atypical. This term is used to indicate a category within a class of disorders
that is residual to the specific categories in that class, although it is recognized
that in some settings what is regarded as an atypical disorder may actually be
more common than any of the specific disorders in that particular class. (In the
literature the term "atypical" has sometimes been used in a different sense—to
describe a specific diagnostic category that has unusual features.)

    Physical disorders. The term "physical disorders" is used to refer to any dis-
order listed in ICD-9-CM outside the chapter on mental disorders.

    Terms in parentheses. In order to facilitate the identification of the cate-
gories that in DSM-II were grouped together in the class of Neuroses, the DSM-
II terms are included separately in parentheses after the corresponding cate-
gories. These DSM-II terms are included in ICD-9-CM and therefore are accept-
able as alternatives to the recommended DSM-III terms that precede them.

    Not due to another disorder. This phrase is used to indicate that the dis-
order being described is not diagnosed if the disturbance is apparently symptom-
atic of another disorder. For example, in the diagnostic criteria for Schizo-
phrenia, there is the phrase, "Not due to any Organic Mental Disorder." This
means that the diagnosis of Schizophrenia is not given if the characteristic
symptoms, such as delusions or hallucinations, are caused by an Organic Mental
Disorder.


           Chapter Three


The Diagnostic Categories:
       Text and Criteria


This page intentionally left blank 


      Disorders Usually First Evident
               In Infancy, Childhood, Or
                                           Adolescence


The disorders described in this chapter are those that usually arise and are first
evident in infancy, childhood, or adolescence. (Exceptions are the Gender Iden-
tity Disorders, classified with the other Psychosexual Disorders.) There is no
arbitrary age limit here that defines childhood and adolescence, and this section
includes some disorders characteristic of older adolescents, such as Identity Dis-
order, which may first appear in early adulthood.
    In diagnosing an infant, child, or adolescent, the clinician should first con-
sider the diagnoses included in this section. If an appropriate diagnosis cannot
be found, disorders described elsewhere in this manual should be considered.
    Because the essential features of Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia are
the same in children and adults, there are no special categories corresponding to
these disorders in this section of the classification. For example, if a child or
adolescent has an illness that meets the criteria for Major Depression, Dysthymic
Disorder, or Schizophrenia, these diagnoses should be given, regardless of the
age of the individual. (In some instances, age-specific associated features that
apply to infants, children, or adolescents are included in the text.)
    Other diagnostic categories that often will be appropriate for children or
adolescents are the following:
    Organic Mental Disorders Somatoform Disorders
    Substance Use Disorders Personality Disorders*
    Schizophrenic Disorders Psychosexual Disorders
    Affective Disorders Adjustment Disorder
    Schizophreniform Disorder Psychological Factors Affecting
    Anxiety Disorders Physical Condition
    Adults should be given diagnoses from this section if, as infants, children,
or adolescents, they manifested any of these conditions and if the condition has
persisted. Examples include Attention Deficit Disorder, Residual Type, and some
cases of Conduct Disorder. Finally, some individuals may develop in adulthood'
a disorder, such as Anorexia Nervosa, that is included in this section because the
disorder usually develops in children or adolescents.
    The classes of disorders described in this section can be separated into five
major groups on the basis of the predominant area of disturbance. This sub-
grouping is done for heuristic purposes, and it is recognized that the designation
of the area of predominant disturbance is at best an approximation.
    I. Intellectual
          Mental Retardation

 For a discussion of the diagnosis of Personality Disorders in children and adolescents, see p. 305.

                                35


36 Diagnostic Categories

    II. Behavioral (overt)
          Attention Deficit Disorder
          Conduct Disorder
   III. Emotional
          Anxiety Disorders of Childhood or Adolescence
          Other Disorders of Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
   IV. Physical
          Eating Disorders
          Stereotyped Movement Disorders
          Other Disorders with Physical Manifestations
    V. Developmental
          Pervasive Developmental Disorders
          Specific Developmental Disorders
    Children often have problems in development that are not subsumed within
the specific DSM-III diagnostic categories, such as precocious sexual activity and
aggressive behavior. In these cases a diagnosis of Unspecified Mental Disorder
may be used, and the predominant features should be described. Similarly, many
children have problems that do not warrant diagnosis as a mental disorder. Such
conditions can be noted with a V code, such as Parent-Child Problem, Childhood
or Adolescent Antisocial Behavior, or Other Specified Family Circumstances.
    A category for child abuse is not included in DSM-III as a mental disorder
(of the abusing parent) since child abuse as an act can be a symptom of many
different disorders or not be associated with any mental disorder. Child abuse
is not included as a separate V code because, when not due to a mental disorder,
it represents merely one of many types of family circumstances that can be
coded as V61.80, Other Specified Family Circumstances. (In ICD-9-CM, there
is a special code, V61.21, Child Abuse, that refers to the situation of child abuse
involving child, parent or both. The code 995.5, Child Maltreatment Syndrome,
identifies the abused child who presents with injuries or other trauma.)

MENTAL RETARDATION*
The essential features are: (1) significantly subaverage general intellectual func-
tioning, (2) resulting in, or associated with, deficits or impairments in adaptive
behavior, (3) with onset before the age of 18. The diagnosis is made regardless
of whether or not there is a coexisting mental or physical disorder.
    General intellectual functioning is defined as an intelligence quotient (IQ)
obtained by assessment with one or more of the individually administered gen-
eral intelligence tests. Significantly subaverage intellectual functioning is defined
as an IQ of 70 or below on an individually administered IQ test. Since any mea-
surement is fallible, an IQ score is generally thought to involve an error of mea-
surement of approximately five points; hence, an IQ of 70 is considered to repre-
sent a band or zone of 65 to 75. Treating the IQ with some flexibility permits
the inclusion in the Mental Retardation category of individuals with IQs some-

* The definitions of Mental Retardation were written in accordance with the terminology and classifi-
cation of the American Association on Mental Deficiency.


                      Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 37

what higher than 70 who truly need special education or other programs. It also
permits exclusion from the diagnosis of those with IQs somewhat lower than 70
if the clinical judgment is that there are no significant deficits or impairment in
adaptive functioning.
    Adaptive behavior refers to the effectiveness with which an individual meets
the standards of personal independence and social responsibility expected of his
or her age and cultural group. There are scales designed to quantify adaptive
behavior, but none is considered sufficiently reliable and valid to be used alone
to evaluate this aspect of functioning. Therefore, clinical judgment is necessary
for the assessment of general adaptation, the individual's age being taken into
consideration. The IQ level of 70 was chosen as the upper limit for Mental Re-
tardation because most people with IQs below 70 are so limited in their adaptive
functioning that they require special services and protection, particularly during
the school-age years.
    The arbitrary IQ ceiling values are based on data indicating a positive asso-
ciation between intelligence (as measured by IQ score) and adaptive behavior.
This association declines at the upper levels of Mild Retardation. Some individ-
uals with an IQ near but below 70 may not have the impairment in adaptive
behavior required for a diagnosis of Mental Retardation.
    When the clinical picture develops for the first time after the age of 18, the
syndrome is a Dementia, not Mental Retardation, and is coded within the Or-
ganic Mental Disorders section of the classification (p. 162). When the clinical
picture develops before the age of 18 in an individual who previously had nor-
mal intelligence, Mental Retardation and Dementia should both be diagnosed.
    Etiologic factors may be primarily biological, psychosocial, or an interac-
tion of both. When a known biological factor is present, the specific biological
condition should be noted on Axis III.

    Associated features. The prevalence of other mental disorders, such as
Stereotyped Movement Disorder, Infantile Autism, and Attention Deficit Dis-
order with Hyperactivity, is three or four times greater among children with
Mental Retardation than in the general population. When another mental dis-
order is present, it should also be coded on Axis I.
    There may be no associated behavioral features other than those reflecting
the Mental Retardation itself, as in some cases of Down's syndrome, or there
may be other behavioral concomitants, such as irritability, aggressivity, temper
tantrums, or stereotyped movements. (When these other behavioral symptoms
require attention or treatment, their presence may be noted in the fifth digit,
P- 41).
    Often there are multiple neurological abnormalities, involving neuromuscu-
lar function, vision or hearing, or seizures, particularly among individuals with
Severe Mental Retardation. These should be noted on Axis III.

    Course. When a specific biological abnormality is present, the course is
usually chronic and without remission, and without treatment the disorder may
become more severe. In mild forms of the disorder with no known etiology, the
course may be self-limited as the individual experiences an increase in intellec-


38 Diagnostic Categories

tual functioning (e.g., from a more stimulating environment) or displays more
adaptive behavior (e.g., outside of the demanding environment of school to which
he or she was unable to adapt).

    Impairment. By definition, there are always deficits or impairments in adap-
tive functioning. The degree of impairment is correlated with the level of gen-
eral intellectual functioning and the presence of the associated features noted
above.

     Complications. The major complication is inability to function indepen-
dently and hence a continuing need for supervision and financial support.

     Etiologic factors and familial pattern. Etiologic factors may be primarily
biological, psychosocial, or an interaction of both. In 25% of the cases, the
etiologic factors are known biological abnormalities, the most common being
chromosomal and metabolic disorders such as Down's syndrome and phenylke-
tonuria. In such cases the diagnosis is usually established at birth or at a rela-
tively young age, and the severity of the Mental Retardation is generally mod-
erate to profound. Heavy maternal alcohol consumption during pregnancy can
cause the fetal alcohol syndrome, manifested by retarded growth, various crani-
ofacial and limb anomalies, and Mental Retardation.
     Mental Retardation due to known biological factors is as likely to occur
among children of upper socioeconomic classes as among those of lower socio-
economic classes. In such cases there is no increased prevalence of Mental Re-
tardation in other family members unless the underlying biological condition is
a genetically determined disorder, such as phenylketonuria or Tay-Sachs disease.
     In the remaining 75% of the cases, no known specific biological factor ac-
counts for the disorder; the level of intellectual impairment is usually mild, with
IQs between 50 and 70; and the diagnosis is commonly not made until school
entrance. The lower socioeconomic classes are overrepresented in these cases of
Mental Retardation; the significance of this is not clear. There is often a familial
pattern of similar degrees of severity of Mental Retardation in parents and
siblings.
     Mental Retardation without known biological etiology may be associated
with psychosocial deprivation of various types, such as deprivation of social,
linguistic, and intellectual stimulation. However, the specific etiology of these
forms of Mental Retardation is unknown. Three sets of etiologic factors are
probably involved, either singly or in combination: genetic factors, environ-
mental biological factors such as malnutrition, and early child-rearing experi-
ences.

     Prevalence. At any one point in time, approximately 1% of the population
meets the criteria for Mental Retardation.

     Sex ratio. The disorder is nearly twice as common among males as among
females.

     Subtypes. There are four subtypes, reflecting the degree of intellectual im-


                      Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 39

pairment and designated as Mild, Moderate, Severe, and Profound. IQ levels to
be used as guides for distinguishing the four subtypes are given below:
            Subtypes of Mental
               Retardation IQ Levels
                Mild 50-70
                Moderate 35-49
                Severe 20-34
                Profound Below 20

317.0 (x) Mild Mental Retardation
Mild Mental Retardation is roughly equivalent to the educational category "edu-
cable." This group makes up the largest segment of those with the disorder—
about 80%. Individuals with this level of Mental Retardation can develop social
and communication skills during the preschool period (ages 0-5), have minimal
impairment in sensorimotor areas, and often are not distinguishable from normal
children until a later age. By their late teens they can learn academic skills up
to approximately the sixth-grade level; and during the adult years, they can
usually achieve social and vocational skills adequate for minimum self-support,
but may need guidance and assistance when under unusual social or economic
stress.

318.0(x) Moderate Mental Retardation
Moderate Mental Retardation is roughly equivalent to the educational category
of "trainable." This group makes up 12% of the entire population of individuals
with Mental Retardation. Those with this level of Mental Retardation during the
preschool period can talk or learn to communicate, but they have only poor
awareness of social conventions. They may profit from vocational training and
can take care of themselves with moderate supervision. During the school-age
period, they can profit from training in social and occupational skills, but are
unlikely to progress beyond the second-grade level in academic subjects. They
may learn to travel alone in familiar places. During their adult years they may
be able to contribute to their own support by performing unskilled or semi-
skilled work under close supervision in sheltered workshops. They need super-
vision and guidance when under mild social or economic stress.

318.1 (x) Severe Mental Retardation
This group makes up 7% of individuals with Mental Retardation. During the
preschool period there is evidence of poor motor development and minimal
speech, and they develop little or no communicative speech. During the school-
age period, they may learn to talk and can be trained in elementary hygiene
skills. They are generally unable to profit from vocational training. During their
adult years they may be able to perform simple work tasks under close super-
vision.

318.2(x) Profound Mental Retardation
This group constitutes less than 1% of individuals with Mental Retardation.
During the preschool period these children display minimal capacity for sensori-


40 Diagnostic Categories

motor functioning. A highly structured environment, with constant aid and
supervision, is required. During the school-age period, some further motor de-
velopment may occur and the children may respond to minimal or limited train-
ing in self-care. Some speech and further motor development may take place
during the adult years, and very limited self-care may be possible, in a highly
structured environment with constant aid and supervision.

319.0(x) Unspecified Mental Retardation
This category should be used when there is a strong presumption of Mental
Retardation but the individual is untestable by standard intelligence tests. This
may be the case when children, adolescents or adults are too impaired or un-
cooperative to be tested. In the case of infants, since the available tests, such as
the Bayley, Cattel, and others, do not yield numerical IQ values, this may be the
case when there is a clinical judgment of significant subaverage intellectual
functioning. In general, the younger the age, the more difficult it is to make a
diagnosis of Mental Retardation, except for those with profound impairment.
    This category should not be used when the intellectual level is presumed to
be above 70 (see V code for Borderline Intellectual Functioning, p. 332).

    Differential diagnosis. The diagnosis of Mental Retardation should be made
whenever present regardless of the presence of another diagnosis. In Specific
Developmental Disorders there is a delay or failure of development in a specific
area, such as reading or language, but in other areas of development the child is
developing normally. In contrast, the child with Mental Retardation shows gen-
eral delays in development in many areas. In Pervasive Developmental Disorders
there are distortions in the timing, rate, and sequence of many basic psychologi-
cal functions involved in the development of social skills and language. Further-
more, there are severe qualitative abnormalities that are not normal for any stage
of development, whereas in Mental Retardation there are generalized delays in
development, but the children behave as if they were passing through an earlier
normal developmental stage. Mental Retardation may, however, coexist with
 Specific Developmental Disorders, and frequently coexists with Pervasive Devel-
opmental Disorders.
    The V code Borderline Intellectual Functioning is given when there are defi-
 cits in adaptive behavior associated with borderline intellectual functioning,
 which generally is in the IQ range of 71 to 84. Differentiating Mild Mental
 Retardation from Borderline Intellectual Functioning requires careful considera-
 tion of all available information, including psychological test scores.

   Diagnostic criteria for Mental Retardation
   A. Significantly subaverage general intellectual functioning: an IQ of 70
   or below on an individually administered IQ test (for infants, since avail-
   able intelligence tests do not yield numerical values, a clinical judgment
   of significant subaverage intellectual functioning).
   B. Concurrent deficits or impairments in adaptive behavior, taking the
   person's age into consideration.


                      Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders

  C, Onset before the age of 18.
      (If there are behavioral symptoms requiring attention or treatment
  [e.g., aggressive behavior, self-mutilation, anxiety symptoms] that are not
  part of another disorder, the non-ICD-9-CM code "1" may be recorded
  in the fifth digit Otherwise, code "0".)

ATTENTION DEFICIT DISORDER
The essential features are signs of developmentally inappropriate inattention and
impulsivity. In the past a variety of names have been attached to this disorder,
including: Hyperkinetic Reaction of Childhood, Hyperkinetic Syndrome, Hyper-
active Child Syndrome, Minimal Brain Damage, Minimal Brain Dysfunction,
Minimal Cerebral Dysfunction, and Minor Cerebral Dysfunction. In this manual
Attention Deficit is the name given to this disorder, since attentional difficulties
are prominent and virtually always present among children with these diagnoses.
In addition, though excess motor activity frequently diminishes in adolescence,
in children who have the disorder, difficulties in attention often persist.
    There are two subtypes of the active disorder, Attention Deficit Disorder
with Hyperactivity, and Attention Deficit Disorder without Hyperactivity, al-
though it is not known whether they are two forms of a single disorder or rep-
resent two distinct disorders. Finally, there is a residual subtype for individuals
once diagnosed as having Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity in which
hyperactivity is no longer present, but other signs of the disorder persist.

314.01 Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity
The essential features are signs of developmentally inappropriate inattention, im-
pulsivity, and hyperactivity. In the classroom, attentional difficulties and impul-
sivity are evidenced by the child's not staying with tasks and having difficulty
organizing and completing work. The children often give the impression that
they are not listening or that they have not heard what they have been told.
Their work is sloppy and is performed in an impulsive fashion. On individually
administered tests, careless, impulsive errors are often present. Performance may
be characterized by oversights, such as omissions or insertions, or misinterpreta-
tions of easy items even when the child is well motivated, not just in situations
that hold little intrinsic interest. Group situations are particularly difficult for
the child, and attentional difficulties are exaggerated when the child is in the
classroom, where sustained attention is expected.
    At home, attentional problems are shown by a failure to follow through on
parental requests and instructions and by the inability to stick to activities, in-
cluding play, for periods of time appropriate for the child's age.
    Hyperactivity in young children is manifested by gross motor activity, such
as excessive running or climbing. The child is often described as being on the
go, "running like a motor," and having difficulty sitting still. Older children and
adolescents may be extremely restless and fidgety. Often it is the quality of the
motor behavior that distinguishes this disorder from ordinary overactivity in that
hyperactivity tends to be haphazard, poorly organized, and not goal-directed.
    In situations in which high levels of motor activity are expected and appro-


42 Diagnostic Categories

priate, such as on the playground, the hyperactivity seen in children with this
disorder may not be obvious.
    Typically, the symptoms of this disorder in any given child vary with situa-
tion and time. A child's behavior may be well-organized and appropriate on a
one-to-one basis but become dysregulated in a group situation or in the class-
room; or home adjustment may be satisfactory and difficulties may emerge only
in school. It is the rare child who displays signs of the disorder in all settings or
even in the same setting at all times.

    Associated features. Associated features vary as a function of age and in-
clude obstinacy, stubbornness, negativism, bossiness, bullying, increased mood
lability, low frustration tolerance, temper outbursts, low self-esteem, and lack
of response to discipline.
    Specific Developmental Disorders are common, and should be noted on
Axis II.
    Nonlocalized "soft" neurological signs, motor-perceptual dysfunctions (e.g.,
poor eye-hand coordination), and EEG abnormalities may be present. However,
in only about 5% of the cases is Attention Deficit Disorder associated with a
diagnosable neurological disorder, which should be coded on Axis III.

    Age at onset. Onset is typically by the age of three, although frequently the
disorder does not come to professional attention until the child enters school.

    Course. There are three characteristic courses. In the first, all of the symp-
toms persist into adolescence or adult life. In the second, the disorder is self-
limited and all of the symptoms disappear completely at puberty. In the third,
the hyperactivity disappears, but the attentional difficulties and impulsivity per-
sist into adolescence or adult life (Residual Type). The relative frequency of these
courses is unknown.

    Impairment. Academic difficulties are common; and although impairment
may be limited to academic functioning, social functioning may be impaired as
well. Infrequently children with this disorder require residential treatment.

    Complications. School failure, Conduct Disorder, and Antisocial Personality
Disorder are the major complications.

    Predisposing factors. Mild or Moderate Mental Retardation, epilepsy, some
forms of cerebral palsy, and other neurological disorders may be predisposing
factors.

    Prevalence. The disorder is common. In the United States, it may occur in
as many as 3% of prepubertal children.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is ten times more common in boys than in girls.


                       Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 43

    Familial pattern. The disorder is apparently more common in family mem-
bers than in the general population.

    Differential diagnosis. Age-appropriate overactivity, as is seen in some par-
ticularly active children, does not have the haphazard and poorly organized
quality characteristic of the behavior of children with Attention Deficit Dis-
order. Children in inadequate, disorganized, or chaotic environments may ap-
pear to have difficulty in sustaining attention and in goal-directed behavior. In
such cases it may be impossible to determine whether the disorganized behavior
is simply a function of the chaotic environment or whether it is due to the
child's psychopathology (in which case the diagnosis of Attention Deficit Dis-
order may be warranted).
    In Severe and Profound Mental Retardation there may be clinical features
that are characteristic of Attention Deficit Disorder. However, the additional
diagnosis of Attention Deficit Disorder would make clinical sense only if the
Mental Retardation were Mild or Moderate in severity.
    Many cases of Conduct Disorder have signs of impulsivity, inattention, and
hyperactivity. The additional diagnosis of Attention Deficit Disorder is fre-
quently warranted.
    In Schizophrenia and Affective Disorders with manic features there may be
clinical features that are characteristic of Attention Deficit Disorder. However,
these diagnoses preempt the diagnosis of Attention Deficit Disorder.

  Diagnostic criteria for Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity
  The child displays, for his or her mental and chronological age, signs of
  developmentally inappropriate inattention, impulsivity, and hyperactivity.
  The signs must be reported by adults in the child's environment, such as
  parents and teachers. Because the symptoms are typically variable, they
  may not be observed directly by the clinician. When the reports of teach-
  ers and parents conflict, primary consideration should be given to the
  teacher reports because of greater familiarity with age-appropriate norms.
  Symptoms typically worsen in situations that require self-application, as
  in the classroom. Signs of the disorder may be absent when the child is
  in a new or a one-to-one situation.
      The number of symptoms specified is for children between the ages
  of eight and ten, the peak age range for referral. In younger children,
  more severe forms of the symptoms and a greater number of symptoms are
  usually present. The opposite is true of older children.

  A. Inattention, At least three of the following:
      (1) often fails to finish things he or she starts
      (2) often doesn't seem to listen
      (3) easily distracted
      (4) has difficulty concentrating on schoolwork or other tasks requir-
      ing sustained attention


44 Diagnostic Categories

       (5) has difficulty sticking to a play activity

  B. Impulsivity. At least three of the following:

       (1) often acts before thinking
       (2) shifts excessively from one activity to another
       (3) has difficulty organizing work (this not being due to cognitive
       impairment)
       (4) needs a lot of supervision
       (5) frequently calls out in class
       (6) has difficulty awaiting turn in games or group situations

  C. Hyperactivity. At least two of the following:

       (1) runs about or climbs on things excessively
       (2) has difficulty sitting still or fidgets excessively
       (3) has difficulty staying seated
       (4) moves about excessively during sleep
       (5) is always "on the go" or acts as if "driven by a motor"

  D. Onset before the age of seven.

  E. Duration of at least six months.

  F. Not due to Schizophrenia, Affective Disorder, or Severe or Profound
  Mental Retardation.

314.00 Attention Deficit Disorder without Hyperactivity
All of the features are the same as those of Attention Deficit Disorder with
Hyperactivity except for the absence of hyperactivity; the associated features
and impairment are generally milder. Prevalence and familial pattern are un-
known.

  Diagnostic criteria for Attention Deficit Disorder without Hyperactivity
  The criteria for this disorder are the same as those for Attention Deficit
  Disorder with Hyperactivity except that the individual never had signs of
  hyperactivity (criterion C).

314.80 Attention Deficit Disorder, Residual Type

  Diagnostic criteria for Attention Deficit Disorder, Residual Type
  A. The individual once met the criteria for Attention Deficit Disorder with
  Hyperactivity. This information may come from the individual or from
  others, such as family members.


                       Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 45

   B. Signs of hyperacttvity are no longer present, but other signs of the
   illness have persisted to the present without periods of remission, as evi-
   denced by signs of both attentional deficits and impulsivity (e.g., diffi-
   culty organizing work and completing tasks, difficulty concentrating, being
   easily distracted, making sudden d€cisions without thought of the con-
   sequences).

   C. The symptoms of inattention and impulsivity result in some impair-
   ment in social or occupational functioning.

   D. Not due to Schizophrenia, Affective Disorder, Severe or Profound
   Mental Retardation, or Schizotypal or Borderline Personality Disorders.

 CONDUCT DISORDER
The essential feature is a repetitive and persistent pattern of conduct in which
 either the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate societal norms or rules
 are violated. The conduct is more serious than the ordinary mischief and pranks
of children and adolescents.
    Four specific subtypes are included: Undersocialized, Aggressive; Underso-
 cialized, Nonaggressive; Socialized, Aggressive; and Socialized, Nonaggressive.
 These subtypes are based on the presence or absence of adequate social bonds
 and the presence or absence of a pattern of aggressive antisocial behavior. The
 validity of these diagnostic subtypes within the category of Conduct Disorder
 is controversial. Some investigators believe that a more useful distinction would
 be on the basis of the variety, frequency, and seriousness of the antisocial be-
 havior rather than the type of disturbance, whereas others believe that the Un-
 dersocialized and Socialized types represent distinct disorders.
    The Undersocialized types are characterized by a failure to establish a nor-
mal degree of affection, empathy, or bond with others. Peer relationships are
 generally lacking, although the youngster may have superficial relationships with
other youngsters. Characteristically the child does not extend himself or herself
for others unless there is an obvious immediate advantage. Egocentrism is shown
by readiness to manipulate others for favors without any effort to reciprocate.
There is generally a lack of concern for the feelings, wishes, and well-being of
others, as shown by callous behavior. Appropriate feelings of guilt or remorse
are generally absent. Such a child may readily inform on his or her companions
and try to place blame on them.
    The Socialized types show evidence of social attachment to others, but may
be similarly callous or manipulative toward persons to whom they are not at-
tached and lack guilt when these "outsiders" are made to suffer.
    The Aggressive types are characterized by a repetitive and persistent pat-
tern of aggressive conduct in which the rights of others are violated, by either
physical violence against persons, or thefts outside the home involving confronta-
tion with a victim. The physical violence may take the form of rape, mugging,
assault, or, in rare cases, homicide. In some cases, the physical violence may be


46 Diagnostic Categories

directed against parents. Thefts outside the home may involve extortion, purse-
snatching, or holdup of a store.
    The Nonaggressive types are characterized by the absence of physical vio-
lence against persons and of robbery outside the home involving confrontation
with a victim. However, there is a persistent pattern of conduct in conflict with
norms for their age, which may take the form of: chronic violations of a variety
of important rules that are reasonable and age-appropriate for the child at home
or at school, such as persistent truancy and substance abuse; running away from
home overnight while living in the parental home; persistent serious lying in and
out of the home; vandalism or fire-setting; or stealing (not involving confronta-
tion of a victim).

    Associated features (all four types). Difficulties at home and in the commu-
nity are common. Frequently there is precocious sexual activity, which may be
aggressive or submissive, depending on subtype. The child typically blames
others for his or her difficulties and feels unfairly treated and mistrustful of
others. Self-esteem is usually low, though the individual may project an image
of "toughness." Unusually early smoking, drinking, and other substance use are
also common. Poor frustration tolerance, irritability, temper outbursts, and pro-
vocative recklessness are often present. Academic achievement is frequently
below the level expected on the basis of intelligence and age. Attentional difficul-
ties are common, and may justify the additional diagnosis of Attention Deficit
Disorder. One or more Specific Developmental Disorders may be present.
    In the Socialized types, sometimes there is membership in a gang and the
antisocial behavior may be limited to gang activities.

    Age at onset. Onset is usually prepubertal for the Undersocialized type and
pubertal or postpubertal for the Socialized type.

    Course. The course is variable, mild forms frequently showing improvement
over time and severe forms tending to be chronic. Some individuals may con-
tinue their antisocial behavior and generally poor social functioning into adult-
hood, particularly the Undersocialized, Aggressive type, and thus qualify for the
diagnosis of Antisocial Personality Disorder. Others may display adequate social
functioning but persist in illegal activity, and may be considered to have Adult
Antisocial Behavior (V Code). Finally, many achieve reasonable social and occu-
pational adjustment as adults, particularly the Socialized, Nonaggressive type.

    Impairment. The degree of impairment varies from mild to severe. It may
preclude attendance in the ordinary school classroom or living at home or in a
foster home. When antisocial behavior is extreme, institutionalization, with its
temporary loss of autonomy, may be necessary.

    Complications. Complications include school suspension, legal difficulties,
Substance Use Disorders, venereal diseases, unwanted pregnancy, high rate of


                      Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 47

physical injury from accidents, fights, along with retaliation by victims, and
suicidal behavior.

    Predisposing factors. Attention Deficit Disorder, parental rejection, incon-
sistent management with harsh discipline, early institutional living, frequent
shifting of parent figures (foster parents, relatives, or stepparents), and being
an illegitimate only child may predispose to the development of the Under-
socialized type. Large family size, association with a delinquent subgroup, and
an absent father or a father with Alcohol Dependence may predispose to the
development of the Socialized type.

    Prevalence. The disorder is common, particularly the Socialized, Nonag-
gressive and the Undersocialized, Aggressive types.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is far more common among boys than among girls,
the ratios ranging from 4:1 to 12:1. The only exception may be the Under-
socialized, Nonaggressive type, which may be equally common in both sexes.

    Familial pattern. The disorder is more common in children of adults with
Antisocial Personality Disorder and Alcohol Dependence than in the general
population.

    Differential diagnosis. Isolated acts of antisocial behavior do not justify a
diagnosis of Conduct Disorder and may be coded as Childhood or Adolescent
Antisocial Behavior (V Codes). The behavior qualifies for a diagnosis of Con-
duct Disorder only if the antisocial behavior represents a repetitive and per-
sistent pattern. When such a pattern exists there will usually be obvious
impairment in social and school functioning that frequently will not be present
when the antisocial behavior represents an isolated act.
    In Oppositional Disorder there are some of the features that are present
in Conduct Disorder, such as disobedience and opposition to authority figures.
However, the basic rights of others and major age-appropriate societal norms
or rules are not violated as they are in Conduct Disorder.
    Attention Deficit Disorder and Specific Developmental Disorder are com-
mon associated diagnoses, and should also be noted when present.

312.00 Conduct Disorder, Undersocialized, Aggressive

  Diagnostic criteria
  A. A repetitive and persistent pattern of aggressive conduct tn which
  the basic rights of others are violated/ as manifested by either of the fol-
  lowing:
      (1) physical violence against persons or property (not to defend
      someone else or oneself), e.g., vandalism, rape, breaking and enter-
      ing, fire-setting, mugging, assault


48 Diagnostic Categories

      (2) thefts outside the home involving confrontation with the victim
      (e.g., extortion, purse-snatching, armed robbery)
  B. Failure to establish a normal degree of affection, empathy, or bond
  with others as evidenced by no more than one of the following in-
  dications of social attachment:
      (1) has one or more peer-group friendships that have lasted over
      six months
      (2) extends himself or herself for others even when no immediate
      advantage is likely
      (3) apparently feels guilt or remorse when such a reaction is ap-
      propriate (not just when caught or in difficulty)
      (4) avoids blaming or informing on companions
      (5) shares concern for the welfare of friends or companions
  C. Duration of pattern of aggressive conduct of at least six months.
  D. If 18 or older, does not meet the criteria for Antisocial Personality
  Disorder.

312.10 Conduct Disorder, Undersocialized, Nonaggressive

  Diagnostic criteria
  A. A repetitive and persistent pattern of nonaggressive conduct in which
  either the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate societal norms
  or rules are violated, as manifested by any of the following:
      (1) chronic violations of a variety of important rules (that are reason-
      able and age-appropriate for the child) at home or at school (e.g.,
      persistent truancy, substance abuse)
      (2) repeated running away from home overnight
      (3) persistent serious lying in and out of the home
      (4) stealing not involving confrontation with a victim
  B. Failure to establish a normal degree of affection, empathy, or bond
  with others as evidenced by no more than one of the following indica-
  tions of social attachment:
      (1) has one or more peer-group friendships that have lasted over
      six months
      (2) extends himself or herself for others even when no immediate
      advantage is likely
      (3) apparently feels guilt or remorse when such a reaction is ap-
      propriate (not just when caught or in difficulty)
      (4) avoids blaming or informing on companions
      (5) shows concern for the welfare of friends or companions
  C. Duration of pattern of nonaggressive conduct of at least six months.


                      Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 49

  D. If 18 or older, does not meet the criteria for Antisocial Personality
  Disorder.

312.23 Conduct Disorder, Socialized, Aggressive

  Diagnostic criteria
  A. A repetitive and persistent pattern of aggressive conduct in which the
  basic rights of others are violated/ as manifested by either of the follow-
  ing:

      (1) physical violence against persons or property (not to defend
      someone else or oneself), e.g., vandalism, rape, breaking and enter-
      ing, fire-setting, mugging, assault
      (2) thefts outside the home involving confrontation with a victim
      (e.g., extortion, purse-snatching, armed robbery)

  B. Evidence of social attachment to others as indicated by at least two
  of the following behavior patterns:

      (1) has one or more peer-group friendships that have lasted over
      six months
      (2) extends himself or herself for others even when no immediate
      advantage is likely
      (3) apparently feels guilt or remorse when such a reaction is ap-
      propriate (not just when caught or in difficulty)
      (4) avoids blaming or informing on companions
      (5) shows concern for the welfare of friends or companions

  C. Duration of pattern of aggressive conduct of at least six months.

  D. If 18 or older, does not meet the criteria for Antisocial Personality
  Disorder.

312.21 Conduct Disorder, Socialized, Nonaggressive

  Diagnostic criteria
  A. A repetitive and persistent pattern of nonaggressive conduct in which
  either the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate societal norms
  or rules are violated, as manifested by any of the following:
      (1) chronic violations of a variety of important rules (that are reason-
      able and age-appropriate for the child) at home or at school (e.g.,
      persistent truancy, substance abuse)
      (2) repeated running away from home overnight
      (3) persistent serious lying in and out of the home
      (4) stealing not involving confrontation with a victim


50 Diagnostic Categories

  B- Evidence of social attachment to others as indicated by at least two
  of the following behavior patterns:
      (1) has one or more peer-group friendships that have lasted over
      six months
      (2) extends himself or herself for others even when no immediate
      advantage is likely
      (3) apparently feels guilt or remorse when such a reaction is ap-
      propriate (not just when caught or in difficulty)
       (4) avoids blaming or informing on companions
       (5) shows concern for the welfare of friends or companions
  C. Duration of pattern of nonaggressive conduct of at least six months.
  D. If 18 or older, does not meet the criteria for Antisocial Personality
   Disorder.

312.90 Atypical Conduct Disorder
This is a residual category for illnesses in which the predominant disturbance
 involves a pattern of conduct in which there is violation of either the basic
 rights of others or major age-appropriate societal norms or rules but which
cannot be classified as one of the specified subtypes of Conduct Disorder.

 ANXIETY DISORDERS OF CHILDHOOD OR ADOLESCENCE
 This subclass includes three disorders in which anxiety is the predominant
 clinical feature. In the first two categories, Separation Anxiety Disorder and
 Avoidant Disorder of Childhood or Adolescence, the anxiety is focused on spe-
 cific situations. In the third category, Overanxious Disorder, the anxiety is gen-
 eralized to a variety of situations.

 309.21 Separation Anxiety Disorder
 The essential feature is a clinical picture in which the predominant disturbance
 is excessive anxiety on separation from major attachment figures or from home
 or other familiar surroundings. When separation occurs, the child may experi-
 ence anxiety to the point of panic. The reaction is beyond that expected at the
 child's developmental level.
     Children with Separation Anxiety Disorder are uncomfortable when they
 travel independently away from the house or from familiar areas. They may
 refuse to visit or sleep at friends' homes, to go on errands, or to attend camp
 or school.* They may be unable to stay in a room by themselves, and may
 display clinging behavior, staying close to the parent, "shadowing" the parent
 around the house. Physical complaints, such as stomachaches, headaches,
 nausea, and vomiting, are common when separation is anticipated or occurs.

 * School refusal is often inaccurately referred to as "school phobia." However, not all school refusal
 is due to separation anxiety. When separation anxiety accounts for school refusal, the child experi-
 ences difficulty being separated from home or family for a variety of purposes, school attendance
 being only one of them. In a true school phobia, the child fears the school situation, whether or
 not he or she is accompanied by the parent.


                      Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 51

Cardiovascular symptoms such as palpitations, dizziness, and faintness are rare
in younger children, but may occur in adolescents.
    When separated from significant others to whom they are attached, these
children are often preoccupied with morbid fears that accidents or illness will
befall their parents or themselves. They often express fear of getting lost and
never being reunited with their parents. The exact nature of the fantasized
mishaps varies. In general, young children have less specific, more amorphous
concerns. As the child gets older, the fears may become systematized around
identifiable potential dangers. Such concerns vary greatly; and many children,
even some older ones, do not report fears of definite threats, but only pervasive
anxiety about ill-defined dangers or death. In addition, children typically ex-
hibit anticipatory anxiety when separation is threatened or impending. In young
children, whose immature cognitive development precludes the formation of
well-defined morbid worries, the mechanism of anticipatory anxiety has not
yet developed, and there is distress only when separation actually occurs.
    Children with this disorder often have fears of animals, monsters, and
situations that are perceived as presenting danger to the integrity of the family
or themselves; consequently, they may have exaggerated fears of muggers,
burglars, kidnappers, car accidents, or plane travel. Concerns about dying are
common.
    These children often have difficulty going to sleep, and may require that
someone stay with them until they fall asleep. They may make their way to
their parents' bed (or that of another significant person, such as a sibling); if
entry to the parental bedroom is barred, they may sleep outside the parents'
door. Nightmares, whose content expresses the child's morbid fears, may occur.
    Some children do not show morbid apprehension about possible harm
befalling them or those close to them, but instead experience acute homesick-
ness and feel uncomfortable to the point of misery and even panic when away
from home. These children yearn to return home, and are preoccupied with
reunion fantasies.
    Children may refuse to see former friends or relatives to avoid accounting
for their difficulties while in school or their absence from school. On occasion
a child may become violent toward an individual who is forcing separation.
    Adolescents with this disorder, especially boys, may deny overconcern
about their mother or the wish to be with her; yet their behavior reflects anxiety
about separation. Thus, they are reluctant or unable to leave the home or the
parent and feel comfortable only in situations in which no separation is de-
manded.
    Although the disorder represents a form of phobia, it is not included among
the Phobic Disorders because it has unique features and is characteristically
associated with childhood.

    Associated features. Fear of the dark is common, and some children have
fixed fears that may appear bizarre. For example, they may report that they see
and feel eyes staring at them in the dark, that mythical animals are glaring at
them, or that bloody creatures are reaching for them.


52 Diagnostic Categories

    Children with this disorder are often described as demanding, intrusive,
and in need of constant attention. Others are described as unusually conscien-
tious, conforming, and eager to please.
    When no demands for separation are made, children with Separation
Anxiety Disorder typically have no interpersonal difficulties. They may com-
plain that no one loves them or cares about them and that they wish they were
dead.

    Age at onset. The age at onset may be as early as preschool age. The
extreme form of the disorder, involving school refusal, seems to begin most
often around ages 11 and 12.

    Course. Typically there are periods of exacerbation and remission over a
period of several years. In some exceptional cases both the anxiety about possi-
ble separation and the avoidance of situations involving separation (e.g., going
away to college) persist for many years.

    Impairment. In its severe form the disorder may be very incapacitating in
that the child is unable to attend school and function independently in a variety
of areas.

    Complications. The child often undergoes elaborate physical examinations
because of numerous somatic complaints. When school refusal occurs, common
complications are academic difficulties and social avoidance.

    Predisposing factors. No specific premorbid personality disturbance is asso-
ciated with Separation Anxiety Disorder. In most cases the disorder develops
after some life stress, typically a loss, the death of a relative or pet, an illness
of the child or a relative, or a change in the child's environment such as a
school change or a move to a new neighborhood.
    Children with this disorder tend to come from families that are close-knit
and caring. The etiologic significance of this familial pattern is not clear.
 Neglected children are underrepresented among those with Separation Anxiety
 Disorders.

    Prevalence. The disorder is apparently not uncommon.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is apparently equally common in both sexes.

    Familial pattern. The disorder is apparently more common in family mem-
 bers than in the general population.

    Differential diagnosis. In early childhood some degree of separation anxiety
 is a normal phenomenon. Clinical judgment must be used to distinguish this
 from the clearly excessive reaction to separation seen in Separation Anxiety
 Disorder. In Overanxious Disorder and Avoidant Disorder of Childhood or


                         Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 53

Adolescence anxiety is not focused on separation. In Pervasive Developmental
Disorder or Schizophrenia anxiety about separation may occur, but is viewed
as due to these conditions rather than as a separate disorder. In Major Depres-
sion occurring in children, the diagnosis Separation Anxiety Disorder should
also be made when the criteria are met for both disorders, since it is difficult to
know which condition should be regarded as the primary disorder. In Conduct
Disorder truancy is common, but the child stays outside of the home and
anxiety about separation is usually not present.

  Diagnostic criteria for Separation Anxiety Disorder
  A. Excessive anxiety concerning separation from those to whom the
  child is attached, as manifested by at least three of the following:

       (1) unrealistic worry about possible harm befalling major attachment
       figures or fear that they will leave and not return
       (2) unrealistic worry that an untoward calamitous event will separate
       the child from a major attachment figure, e.g., the child will be lost,
       kidnapped, killed, or be the victim of an accident
       (3) persistent reluctance or refusal to go to school in order to stay
       with major attachment figures or at home
       (4) persistent reluctance or refusal to go to sleep without being
       next to a major attachment figure or to go to sleep away from home
       (5) persistent avoidance of being alone in the home and emotional
       upset if unable to follow the major attachment figure around the
       home
       (6) repeated nightmares involving theme of separation
       (7) complaints of physical symptoms on school days, e.g., stomach-
       aches, headaches, nausea, vomiting
       (8) signs of excessive distress upon separation, or when anticipating
       separation, from major attachment figures, e.g., temper tantrums or
       crying, pleading with parents not to leave (for children below the
       age of six, the distress must be of panic proportions)
       (9) social withdrawal, apathy, sadness, or difficulty concentrating on
       work or play when not with a major attachment figure

  B. Duration of disturbance of at least two weeks.

  C. Not due to a Pervasive Developmental Disorder, Schizophrenia, or
  any other psychotic disorder.

  D. If 18 or older, does not meet the criteria for Agoraphobia.


313.21 Avoidant Disorder of Childhood or Adolescence
The essential feature is a clinical picture in which the predominant disturbance


54 Diagnostic Categories

is a persistent and excessive shrinking from contact with strangers of sufficient
severity so as to interfere with social functioning in peer relationships, coupled
with a clear desire for affection and acceptance, and relationships with family
members and other familiar figures that are warm and satisfying.
    Children with this disorder may cling and whisper to their caretakers, and
become tearful and anxious when confronted with even trivial demands for
contact with strangers. Social avoidance may be indicated by inhibition of motor
action or initiative. Although there is no impairment in communicative skills,
such children may seem inarticulate or even mute when social anxiety is severe.
Embarrassment and timidity are conveyed by these children, although they seem
interested and eager for social relationships.

    Associated features. Usually such children are unassertive and lack self-
confidence. In adolescence, inhibition of normal psychosexual activity may be
noted.

    Age at onset. The disorder may develop as early as two and a half years,
after stranger anxiety as a normal developmental phenomenon should have
disappeared.

    Course. The course seems variable, some children improving spontaneously
while others experience an episodic or chronic course. How often this disorder
becomes chronic and continues into adulthood as Avoidant Personality Disorder
is unknown. In general, however, it is believed that this rarely occurs.

    Impairment. Age-appropriate socialization skills may not develop. It is rare
for the impairment in functioning to be severe.

    Predisposing factors. No information.

    Complications. The most serious complication is failure to form social
bonds beyond the family, with resulting feelings of isolation and depression.

    Prevalence. The disorder is apparently uncommon.

    Sex ratio and familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. Socially reticent children are slow to warm up to
strangers, but after a short time can respond, and suffer no impairment in peer
interaction.
    In Separation Anxiety Disorder, the anxiety is due to separation from the
home or major attachment figures rather than to contact with strangers per se.
In Overanxious Disorder, anxiety is not limited to, or focused on, contact with
strangers. In Schizoid Disorder of Childhood or Adolescence there is also dis-
comfort in social situations, but there is little desire for social involvement,
whereas in Avoidant Disorder of Childhood or Adolescence there is a clear
desire for affection and acceptance. Avoidant Personality Disorder, rather than


                       Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 55

 Avoidant Disorder of Childhood or Adolescence, should be diagnosed only if
 the behavioral pattern has existed for many years and the individual is at least
 18 years old. In Adjustment Disorder with Withdrawal, the behavioral pattern
 of withdrawal is clearly related to a recent psychosocial stressor.

   Diagnostic criteria for Avoidant Disorder of Childhood or Adolescence
   A. Persistent and excessive shrinking from contact with strangers.

   B. Desire for affection and acceptance, and generally warm and satisfy-
   ing relations with family members and other familiar figures.

   C. Avoidant behavior sufficiently severe to interfere with social function-
   ing in peer relationships.

   D. Age at least 2Va. If 18 or older, does not meet the criteria for Avoid-
   ant Personality Disorder.

   E. Duration of the disturbance of at least six months.

 313.00 Overanxious Disorder
 The essential feature is a clinical picture in which the predominant disturbance
 is excessive worrying and fearful behavior that is not focused on a specific
 situation or object (such as separation from a parent or entering new social
 interaction) and that is not due to a recent psychosocial stressor. The child
 worries about future events, such as examinations, the possibility of injury, or
 inclusion in peer group activities; or about meeting expectations, such as dead-
 lines, keeping appointments, or performing chores. An inordinate amount of
 time may be spent asking about the discomforts or dangers of a variety of
 situations. For example, routine visits to the doctor may be anticipated with
 excessive concern about minor procedures.
    The anxiety is typically expressed as concern with competence in a variety
of areas, with the focus of concern on what others will think of his or her
performance. In some cases physical concomitants of anxiety are apparent, as
manifested by complaints of a lump in the throat, gastrointestinal distress,
headache, shortness of breath, nausea, dizziness, or other somatic discomforts.
Difficulty falling asleep is common. The child may persistently complain about
"feeling nervous."
    There may be preoccupation with a neighbor or adult school figure who
seems "mean" or critical. As the child gets older, the preoccupations usually
systematize around conventional forms of judgment such as peer, social, or
athletic acceptance, school grades, and even behavior of other family members
that might embarrass the child.

    Associated features. Children with this disorder may seem hypermature
with their "precocious" concerns. Perfectionist tendencies, with obsessional self-


56 Diagnostic Categories

doubt, may be present; there may be excessive conformity and seeking of
approval. Sometimes there is an excess of motor restlessness or nervous habits
such as nail biting or hair pulling.

    Course. The onset may be sudden or gradual, with exacerbations associated
with stress. The disorder may persist into adult life, as an Anxiety Disorder, such
as Generalized Anxiety Disorder or a Social Phobia.

    Age at onset. No information.

    Impairment. In unusually severe cases this disorder can be incapacitating
and result in inability to meet realistic demands at home and in school.

    Complications. Complications may include unnecessary medical evaluation
for somatic symptoms, poor school performance, and failure to engage in age-
appropriate activities in which there are demands for performance, such as
sports.

    Predisposing factors. This disorder seems more common in eldest children,
small families, upper socioeconomic groups, and families in which there is a
concern about performance even when the child functions at an adequate or
superior level.

    Prevalence. The disorder is apparently common.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is apparently more common in boys than in girls.

    Familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. In Separation Anxiety Disorder, the anxiety is fo-
 cused on situations involving separation (e.g., going to school). Children with
 Attention Deficit Disorder may appear nervous and jittery, but are not unduly
 concerned about the future. The two disorders, however, may coexist. In Ad-
 justment Disorder with Anxious Mood, the anxiety is always clearly related to
 the recent occurrence of a psychosocial stressor.
     Overanxious Disorder should not be diagnosed when the anxiety is due to
 another disorder, such as Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, Major Depression,
 Schizophrenia, or Pervasive Developmental Disorder.

   Diagnostic criteria for Overanxious Disorder
   A. The predominant disturbance is generalized and persistent anxiety or
   worry (not related to concerns about separation), as manifested by at
   least four of the following:

       (1) unrealistic worry about future events


                       Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 57

       |2) preoccupation with the appropriateness of the individual's be-
       havior in the past
       (3) overconcern about competence in a variety of areas, e.g., aca-
       demic, athletic, social
       (4) excessive need for reassurance about a variety of worries
       (5) somatic complaints, such as headaches or stomachaches, for
       which no physical basis can be established
       (6) marked self-consciousness or susceptibility to embarrassment or
       humiliation
       (7) marked feelings of tension or inability to relax

   B. The symptoms in A have persisted for at least six months,

   C. If 18 or older, does not meet the criteria for Generalized Anxiety Dis-
  order.

   D. The disturbance is not due to another mental disorder, such as Sepa-
   ration Anxiety Disorder, Avoidant Disorder of Childhood or Adolescence,
   Phobic Disorder, Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, Depressive Disorder,
  Schizophrenia, or a Pervasive Developmental Disorder,

OTHER DISORDERS OF INFANCY, CHILDHOOD, OR ADOLESCENCE
313.89 Reactive Attachment Disorder of Infancy
The essential features of this disorder are signs of poor emotional development
(lack of age-appropriate signs of social responsiveness, apathetic mood) and
physical development (failure to thrive), with onset before eight months of age,
because of lack of adequate caretaking. The disturbance is not due to a physical
disorder, Mental Retardation, or Infantile Autism. Some severe cases of this
disorder have also been called "failure to thrive" or "hospitalism."
    Infants with this disorder present with poorly developed social responsiv-
ity. By two months of age visual tracking of eyes and faces may not be estab-
lished; the smile response and gaze reciprocity may be absent. At four to five
months the infant may fail to participate in playful, simple games with the
caretaker or observer, to attempt vocal reciprocity, to reach out when he or she
is to be picked up, to reach spontaneously for the mother, or to turn his or her
head toward the side from which the voice of the caretaker or observer comes.
At seven to eight months the infant may not yet be crawling, establishing visual
or vocal communication with the caretaker, beginning to imitate the caretaker,
or displaying any of the usual more subtle facial expressions of coyness, at-
tentiveness, etc.
    The child is apathetic; staring, weak cry, poor muscle tone, weak rooting
and grasping reactions to attempts to feed, and low spontaneous motility are
commonly observed. Excessive sleep and a rather generalized lack of interest in
the environment are frequent manifestations of the disorder.


58 Diagnostic Categories

    Often such infants are noticed by a pediatrician because of their failure to
thrive. Since these infants frequently do not receive well-baby care, the reason
for the visit to the pediatrician may be a complicating physical illness, usually
infectious, or an associated feeding problem (e.g., rumination). The head cir-
cumference is generally normal, and the failure to gain weight is disproportion-
ately greater than the failure (if any) to gain in length.
    The diagnosis of Reactive Attachment Disorder of Infancy can be made
only in the presence of clear evidence of lack of adequate care. This frequently
requires either a home visit, observation of the interaction between the mother
or surrogate parent and the infant during both feeding and nonfeeding periods,
or reports from other observers. Maternal reports may not be reliable.
    It is pathognomonic of this disorder that, except in cases of extreme neglect
with consequent severe physical complications (e.g., starvation, dehydration, or
other intercurrent physical complications that can cause death before therapeutic
measures can take hold), the clinical picture can be completely reversed by
adequate care. (Such care need not be provided by a single person to be effec-
tive; it can include hospitalization, for example.) Such a therapeutic response
is ultimate confirmation of the diagnosis.

    Associated features. Feeding disturbances may be present, in particular,
rumination, regurgitations, and vomiting. Such disturbances may be related to
psychosocial deprivation and may, in turn, be a central factor in malnutrition.
    Child abuse is sometimes observed, but neglect is more common.

    Age at onset. The diagnosis can be made as early as in the first month of
life. Onset of the disorder is always before eight months, since attachments are
formed by eight months if there has been adequate caretaking. A similar clinical
picture with onset past the eighth month of age should be diagnosed as Major
Depression if the appropriate criteria are met.

    Course, impairment, and complications. If care remains grossly inadequate,
severe malnutrition, intercurrent infection, and death can occur. As noted above,
however, the disorder is reversible with appropriate treatment and does not
recur if affectionate care is provided, preferably from a single primary care-
taker. In the absence of severe physical complications and with the proper
treatment, psychological complications are likely to be limited to the effects that
long-term institutionalization, if a factor in a particular case, may have on
personality development.

    Predisposing factors. All factors that interfere with early emotional "bond-
ing" can predispose to this disorder.
    With regard to the caretaker, these include: severe depression, maternal
isolation and lack of support systems, obsessions of infanticide that make the
mother stay away from the infant, maternal neglect and indifference toward the
infant, extreme deprivation during the mother's own childhood, and lack of
opportunities to learn about maternal behavior.
    Babies that are "difficult" or very lethargic may frustrate the caretaker


                      Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 59

excessively and enhance chances of the disorder's developing; but the role of
such factors is not entirely clear.
    Other factors that predispose to the disorder are lack of body-to-body
contact during the first weeks of life, such as a prolonged period in an incubator
or other early separations from a caring adult.
    The relative contribution of psychosocial deprivation and simple food
deprivation to the development of this disorder is unknown, but it is likely that
both factors play a part in the majority of cases.

    Prevalence, sex ratio, and familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. Children with Mental Retardation develop slowly,
but show no medically unexplainable failure to thrive unless Reactive Attach-
ment Disorder of Infancy is also present. Children with Infantile Autism may
display lack of attachment behavior as infants, but they usually show no failure
to thrive, and there is generally no evidence of lack of caretaking. However,
Infantile Autism and Reactive Attachment Disorder of Infancy can coexist.
    Children with a variety of severe neurological abnormalities such as deaf-
ness, blindness, profound multisensory defects, major CNS disease, or severe
chronic physical illness may have very specific needs and few means of satisfying
them and thus may suffer minor secondary attachment disturbances.
    In psychosocial dwarfism there may also be apathy, parental neglect, and
disappearance of symptoms with hospitalization. However, psychosocial dwarf-
ism generally has a later onset than Reactive Attachment Disorder of Infancy,
and the failure of the infant to gain in length with little change or actual
increase in weight is the major manifestation.
    Major Depression should be considered if this clinical picture develops
after eight months of age.

  Diagnostic criteria for Reactive Attachment Disorder of Infancy
  A. Age at onset before eight months.

  B. Lack of the type of care that ordinarily leads to the development of
  affectionaf bonds to others, e.g., gross emotional neglect, imposed social
  isolation in an institution.

  C. Lack of developmentaHy appropriate signs of social responsivity, as
  indicated by at least several of the following (the total number of be-
  haviors looked for will depend on the chronological age of the child,
  corrected for prematurity):

      (1) lack of visual tracking of eyes and faces by an infant more than
      two months of age
      (2) lack of smiling in response to faces by an infant more than two
      months of age


60 Diagnostic Categories

      (3) lack of visual reciprocity in an infant of more than two months;
      lack of vocal reciprocity with caretaker in an infant of more than
      five months
      (4) lack of alerting and turning toward caretaker's voice by an infant
      of more than four months
      (5) lack of spontaneous reaching for the mother by an infant of more
      than four months
      (6) lack of anticipatory reaching when approached to be picked up,
      by an infant more than five months of age
      (7) lack of participation in playful games with caretaker by an infant
      of more than five months

  D. At least three of the following:
      (1) weak cry
      (2) excessive sleep
      (3) lack of interest in the environment
      (4) hypomotility
      (5) poor muscle tone
      (6) weak rooting and grasping in response to feeding attempts

  E. Weight loss or failure to gain appropriate amount of weight for age
   unexplainable by any physical disorder. In these cases usually the failure
  to gain weight (falling weight percentile) is disproportionately greater
  than failure to gain length; head circumference is normal.

  F. Not due to a physical disorder, Mental Retardation, or Infantile
  Autism.
  G. The diagnosis is confirmed if the clinical picture is reversed shortly
   after institution of adequate caretaking, which frequently includes short-
   term hospital ization.

 313.22 Schizoid Disorder of Childhood or Adolescence
 The essential feature is a defect in the capacity to form social relationships that
 is not due to any other mental disorder, such as Pervasive Developmental
 Disorder; Conduct Disorder, Undersocialized, Nonaggressive; or any psychotic
 disorder, such as Schizophrenia.
     Children with this disorder have no close friend of similar age other than
 a relative or a similarly socially isolated child. They do not appear distressed by
 their isolation, show little desire for social involvement, and prefer to be
 "loners," although they may be attached to a parent or other adult. When
 placed in social situations, they are uncomfortable, inept, and awkward. They
 have no interest in activities that involve other children, such as team sports
 and clubs. They often appear aloof, reserved, withdrawn, and seclusive.

     Associated features. These children may be belligerent and irritable, espe-
 cially when demands for social performance are made. They are erratically


                      Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 61

sensitive to criticism, displaying occasional outbursts of aggressive behavior.
They are frequently scapegoated by their peers.
    These children often are vague about their goals, indecisive, absentminded,
and detached from their environment ("not with it" or "in a fog"). They often
appear self-absorbed and engage in excessive daydreaming. They tend to pursue
solitary interests and hobbies and are often preoccupied with esoteric topics,
such as violence or supernatural phenomena. However, they show no loss of
reality testing.

    Age at onset. The disorder always begins in childhood and can be differen-
tiated from normal social reticence as early as five years of age.

    Course. The course is not well known. In some there may be increased
withdrawal and detachment in adolescence and continuity with adult Schizoid
Personality Disorder or Schizophrenia. In others the disorder is self-limited, with
increased socialization during adolescence.

    Impairment. Social relations are, by definition, severely restricted, with fail-
ure to learn the social skills necessary for adequate social functioning. Academic
performance is often impaired.

    Complications. Schizoid Personality Disorder and Schizophrenia may de-
velop as complications of this disorder.

    Prevalence. This disorder is apparently rare.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is much more common in boys than in girls.

    Predisposing factors and familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. Children with Avoidant Disorder of Childhood or
Adolescence are interested in social participation, but are inhibited by anxiety
from forming social contacts. Peer interaction, once established, is enjoyed. In
Schizophrenia and Pervasive Developmental Disorders there are psychotic symp-
toms or marked defects in multiple areas of functioning. In Conduct Disorder,
Undersocialized, Nonaggressive the predominant disturbance is antisocial be-
havior.

  Diagnostic criteria for Schizoid Disorder of Childhood or Adolescence
  A. No close friend of similar age other than a relative or a similarly so-
  cially isolated child.

  B. No apparent interest in making friends.

  C. No pleasure from usual peer interactions.

  D. General avoidance of nonfamilial social contacts, especially with peers.


62 Diagnostic Categories

  E. No interest in activities that involve other children {such as team sports,
  clubs),

  F. Duration of the disturbance of at least three months.

  G. Not due to Pervasive Developmental Disorder; Conduct Disorder,
  Undersocialized, Nonaggressive; or any psychotic disorder, such as
  Schizophrenia,

  H. If 18 or older, does not meet the criteria for Schizoid Personality
  Disorder.

313.23 Elective Mutism
The essential feature is continuous refusal to speak in almost all social situa-
tions, including at school, despite ability to comprehend spoken language and
to speak. These children may communicate via gestures, by nodding or shaking
the head, or, in some cases, by monosyllabic or short, monotone utterances.
    Children with this disorder generally have normal language skills, though
some have delayed language development and abnormalities of articulation. The
refusal to speak is not, however, due to a language insufficiency or another
mental disorder.

    Associated features. Excessive shyness, social isolation and withdrawal,
clinging, school refusal, Functional Encopresis, Functional Enuresis, compulsive
traits, negativism, temper tantrums, or other controlling or oppositional behav-
ior, particularly in the home, may be observed.

    Age at onset. Although onset is usually before age five, the disturbance may
come to clinical attention only with entry into school.

    Course. In most cases the disturbance lasts only a few weeks or months,
although in a few it continues for several years.

    Impairment. There may be severe impairment in social and school func-
tioning.

    Complications. School failure and teasing or scapegoating by peers are
common complications.

    Predisposing factors. Maternal overprotection, speech disorders, Mental
Retardation, immigration, hospitalization or trauma before age three, and enter-
ing school may be predisposing factors.

    Prevalence. The disorder is apparently rare: it is found in less than 1% of
child-guidance, clinical, and school-social-casework referrals.


                       Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 63

     Sex ratio. The disorder is slightly more common in girls than in boys.

     Familial pattern. No information.

     Differential diagnosis. In Severe or Profound Mental Retardation, Pervasive
 Developmental Disorder, or Developmental Language Disorder, there may be
 general inability to speak. In Major Depression, Avoidant Disorder of Child-
 hood or Adolescence, Overanxious Disorder, Oppositional Disorder, and Social
 Phobia, there may be a general refusal to speak. However, in none of these
 disorders is the lack of speaking the predominant disturbance.
    Children in families who have emigrated to a country of a different
 language may refuse to speak the new language. When comprehension of the
 new language is adequate but the refusal to speak persists, Elective Mutism
 should be diagnosed.

   Diagnostic criteria for Elective Mutism
  A. Continuous refusal to talk in almost all social situations, including at
  school,

  B. Ability to comprehend spoken language and to speak.

  C Not due to another mental or physical disorder.

313.81 Oppositional Disorder
The essential feature is a pattern of disobedient, negativistic, and provocative
opposition to authority figures. The diagnosis is not made if there is a pattern
in which the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate societal norms or
rules are violated, in which case the diagnosis of Conduct Disorder is made, or
if the disturbance is due to another mental disorder, such as Schizophrenia or
Pervasive Developmental Disorder. If the individual is 18 years or older, the
disturbance does not meet the criteria for Passive-Aggressive Personality Dis-
order.
    The Oppositional attitude is toward family members, particularly the par-
ents, and toward teachers. The most striking feature is the persistence of the
Oppositional attitude even when it is destructive to the interests and well-being
of the child or adolescent. For example, if there is a rule, it is usually violated;
if a suggestion is made, the individual is against it; if asked to do something,
the individual refuses or becomes argumentative; if asked to refrain from an
act, the child or adolescent feels obliged to carry it out. The behavior may, in
fact, deprive the individual of productive activity and pleasurable relationships.
    The continually confronting quality of these individuals is typical of their
style and relationships. At times they may appear to be conforming, but in their
conformity they still remain provocative toward those around them. Their
provocation is often directed toward adults, but may well include other children.


64 Diagnostic Categories

If the individual is thwarted, temper tantrums are likely. These children or
adolescents use negativism, stubbornness, dawdling, procrastination, and passive
resistance to external authority.
    Usually the individual does not regard himself or herself as "oppositional,"
but sees the problem as arising from other people, who are making unreasonable
demands. The disorder generally causes more distress to those around him or
her than to the person himself or herself.

    Associated features. School and family difficulties are common. There may
be use of illegal substances, such as cannabis and alcohol (before the legal age).

    Age at onset. The disorder may begin as early as three years, but more
commonly begins in late childhood or adolescence.

    Course. The course is usually chronic and lasts for several years. In some
cases there may be continuity with adult Passive-Aggressive Personality Dis-
order.

    Impairment. The disorder can interfere with all social relationships. It may
cause serious academic problems if it includes refusal to learn.

    Complications. School failure is a common complication.

    Predisposing factors, prevalence, sex ratio, familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. Oppositional behavior in 18-to-36-month-old chil-
dren is part of a normal developmental phase. The diagnosis of Oppositional
Disorder should be considered only if severe Oppositional behavior persists
beyond this period.
    In Conduct Disorder there is violation of either the basic rights of others
or major age-appropriate societal norms and rules, whereas in Oppositional
Disorder the disturbance is never so severe and therefore does not extend to
persistent lying, violation of major rules (e.g., truancy), theft, physical aggres-
 sion, or vandalism. In some instances what first appears to be Oppositional
Disorder may later turn out to be an early manifestation of Conduct Disorder.
    In Schizophrenia and Pervasive Developmental Disorders there may be
persistent Oppositional behavior. However, if the Oppositional behavior is due
to these disorders, the diagnosis of Oppositional Disorder is not made.
    Some cases of Attention Deficit Disorder, Mental Retardation, or chronic
Organic Mental Disorders may also meet the criteria for this disorder, in which
case both diagnoses should be made.

  Diagnostic criteria for Oppositional Disorder
  A. Onset after 3 years of age and before age 18,


                       Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 65

   B. A pattern, for at least six months, of disobedient, negativistic, and pro-
   vocative opposition to authority figures, as manifested by at least two of
   the following symptoms:

       (1) violations of minor rules
       (2) temper tantrums
       (3) argumentativeness
       (4) provocative behavior
       (5) stubbornness

   C. No violation of the basic rights of others or of major age-appropriate
   societal norms or rules (as in Conduct Disorder); and the disturbance is
   not due to another mental disorder, such as Schizophrenia or a Perva-
   sive Developmental Disorder.

   D. If 18 or older, does not meet the criteria for Passive-Aggressive Per-
   sonality Disorder.

 313.82 Identity Disorder
 The essential feature is severe subjective distress regarding inability to reconcile
 aspects of the self into a relatively coherent and acceptable sense of self. There
 is uncertainty about a variety of issues relating to identity, including long-term
 goals, career choice, friendship patterns, sexual orientation and behavior, reli-
 gious identification, moral values, and group loyalties. These symptoms last at
 least three months and result in impairment in social or occupational (including
 academic) functioning. The disturbance is not due to another mental disorder,
 such as Affective Disorder, Schizophrenia, or Schizophreniform Disorder; and if
 the individual is 18 years or older, the disturbance does not meet the criteria for
 Borderline Personality Disorder.
    The uncertainty regarding long-term goals may be expressed as inability to
choose or adopt a life pattern, for example, one dedicated to material success, or
service to the community, or even some combination of the two. Conflict regard-
ing career choice may be expressed as inability to decide on a career or as in-
ability to pursue an apparently chosen field. Conflict regarding friendship pat-
terns may be manifested as inability to decide the kinds of people with whom
to be friendly and the degree of intimacy to have. Conflict regarding values and
loyalties may include concerns over religious identification, patterns of sexual
behavior, and moral issues. The individual experiences these conflicts as irrecon-
cilable aspects of his or her personality and, as a result, fails to perceive himself
or herself as having a coherent identity. Frequently, the disturbance is epitomized
by the individual's asking the question "Who am I?"

    Associated features. Mild anxiety and depression are common and are usu-
ally related to inner preoccupation rather than external events. Self-doubt and
doubt about the future are usually present, with either difficulty in making
choices or impulsive experimentation. Negative or oppositional patterns are often


66 Diagnostic Categories

chosen in an attempt to establish an independent identity distinct from family
or other close individuals. Such attempts may be manifested as transient experi-
mental phases of widely divergent behavior as the individual "tries on" various
roles.

    Age at onset and course. The most common age at onset is late adolescence,
when individuals generally become detached from their family value systems and
attempt to establish independent identities. (This diagnosis appears in this sec-
tion of the manual because the most common onset is in adolescence.) As value
systems change, this disorder may also appear in young adulthood, or even in
middle age, if an individual begins to question earlier life decisions.
    Frequently there is a phase with acute onset, which either resolves over a
period of time or becomes chronic. In other instances the onset is more gradual.
If the disorder begins in adolescence, it usually is resolved by the mid-20s. If it
becomes chronic, however, the individual may be unable to establish a career
commitment or may fail to form lasting emotional attachments, with resulting
frequent shifts in jobs, relationships, and career directions.

    Impairment. The degree of impairment varies. Usually there is some inter-
ference in occupational and social functioning, with deterioration in friendships
and family relationships.

    Complications. Educational achievement and work performance below that
appropriate to the individual's intellectual ability may result from this disorder.

    Prevalence. No information. The disorder is apparently more common now
than several decades ago, however, perhaps because today there are more op-
tions regarding values, behavior, and life-styles open to the individual and more
 conflict between adolescent peer values and parental or societal values.

    Predisposing factors, sex ratio, and familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. Normal conflicts associated with maturing, such as
"adolescent turmoil" or "middle-age crisis," are usually not associated with se-
 vere distress and impairment in occupational or social functioning. Nevertheless,
 if the criteria are met, the diagnosis of Identity Disorder should be given regard-
 less of the developmental stage of the individual.
     In Schizophrenia, Schizophreniform Disorder, and Affective Disorder there
 frequently are marked disturbances in identity, but these diagnoses preempt the
 diagnosis of Identity Disorder.
     In Borderline Personality Disorder identity disturbances are only one of
 several important areas of disturbance, and there is often considerable mood dis-
 turbance. If the individual is 18 or over and meets the criteria for Borderline
 Personality Disorder, then that diagnosis preempts the diagnosis of Identity Dis-
 order. What appears initially to be Identity Disorder may later turn out to have
 been an early manifestation of one of the disorders noted above.


                      Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 67

  Diagnostic criteria for Identity Disorder
  A. Severe subjective distress regarding uncertainty about a variety of
  issues relating to identity, including three or more of the following:

      (1) long-term goals
      (2) career choice
      (3) friendship patterns
      (4) sexual orientation and behavior
      (5) religious identification
      (6) moral value systems
      (7) group loyalties

  B. Impairment in social or occupational (including academic) functioning
  as a result of the symptoms in A.

  C. Duration of the disturbance of at least three months.

  D. Not due to another mental disorder, such as Affective Disorder,
  Schizophrenia, or Schizophreniform Disorder,

  E. If 18 or older, does not meet the criteria for Borderline Personality
  Disorder.

EATING DISORDERS
This subclass of disorders is characterized by gross disturbances in eating be-
havior; it includes Anorexia Nervosa, Bulimia, Pica, Rumination Disorder of
Infancy, and Atypical Eating Disorder. Bulimia usually has a chronic, remitting
course, whereas the other three specific disorders commonly are limited to a sin-
gle episode. Two of these, Anorexia Nervosa and Rumination Disorder of In-
fancy, may have an unremitting course that progresses to death.
    Simple obesity is included in ICD-9-CM as a physical disorder and is not
in this section since it is not generally associated with any distinct psychological
or behavioral syndrome. However, when there is evidence that psychological
factors are of importance in the etiology or course of a particular case of obesity,
this can be indicated by noting Psychological Factors Affecting Physical Condi-
tion (p. 303).

307.10 Anorexia Nervosa
The essential features are intense fear of becoming obese, disturbance of body
image, significant weight loss, refusal to maintain a minimal normal body weight,
and amenorrhea (in females). The disturbance cannot be accounted for by a
known physical disorder. (The term "anorexia" is a misnomer, since loss of ap-
petite is usually rare until late in the illness.)
    Individuals with this disorder say they "feel fat" when they are of normal
weight or even emaciated. They are preoccupied with their body size and often


68 Diagnostic Categories

gaze at themselves in a mirror. At least 25% of their original body weight is lost,
and a minimal normal weight for age and height is not maintained.
    The weight loss is usually accomplished by a reduction in total food intake,
with a disproportionate decrease in high carbohydrate- and fat-containing foods,
self-induced vomiting, use of laxatives or diuretics, and extensive exercising.
    The individual usually comes to medical attention when weight loss be-
comes significant. When it becomes profound, physical signs such as hypother-
mia, dependent edema, bradycardia, hypotension, lanugo (neonatal-like hair),
and a variety of metabolic changes occur. Amenorrhea often appears before no-
ticeable weight loss has occurred.

    Associated features. Some individuals with this disorder cannot exert con-
tinuous control over their intended voluntary restriction of food intake and have
bulimic episodes (eating binges), often followed by vomiting. Other peculiar be-
havior concerning food is common. For example, individuals with this disorder
often prepare elaborate meals for others, but tend to limit themselves to a nar-
row selection of low-calorie foods. In addition, food may be hoarded, concealed,
crumbled, or thrown away.
    Most individuals with this disorder steadfastly deny the illness and are un-
interested in, even resistant to, therapy. Many of the adolescents have delayed
psychosexual development, and adults have a markedly decreased interest in
sex. Compulsive behavior, such as hand-washing, may be present during the ill-
ness. A higher than expected frequency of urogenital abnormalities and Turner's
 syndrome has been found in individuals with Anorexia Nervosa.

    Age at onset. Age at onset is usually early to late adolescence, although it
 can range from prepuberty to the early 30s (rare).

    Sex ratio and prevalence. This disorder occurs predominantly in females
 (95%). As many as 1 in 250 females between 12 and 18 years (high-risk age
 group) may develop the disorder.

    Course. The course may be unremitting until death by starvation, episodic,
 or, most commonly, a single episode with full recovery.

     Impairment. The severe weight loss often necessitates hospitalization to pre-
 vent death by starvation.

     Complications. Follow-up studies indicate mortality rates between 15% and
 21%.

     Familial pattern. The disorder is more common among sisters and mothers
 of individuals with the disorder than in the general population.

     Predisposing factors. In some individuals the onset of illness is associated
 with a stressful life situation. Many of these individuals are described as having


                       Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 69

 been overly perfectionist "model children." About one-third of the individuals
 are mildly overweight before the onset of the illness.

     Differential diagnosis. In Depressive Disorders, and certain physical disor-
 ders, weight loss can occur, but there is no intense fear of obesity or disturbance
 of body image.
     In Schizophrenia there may be bizarre eating patterns; however, the full
 syndrome of Anorexia Nervosa is rarely present; when it is, both diagnoses
 should be given.
     In Bulimia, weight loss, if it does occur, is never as great as 25% of original
 body weight. In rare instances an episode of Anorexia Nervosa occurs in an in-
 dividual with Bulimia, in which case both diagnoses are given.

   Diagnostic criteria for Anorexia Nervosa
   A. Intense fear of becoming obese, which does not diminish as weight
   loss progresses.

   B. Disturbance of body image, e.g., claiming to "feel fat" even when
   emaciated.

   C Weight loss of at least 25% of original body weight or, if under 18
   years of age, weight loss from original body weight plus projected weight
   gain expected from growth charts may be combined to make the 25%.

   D. Refusal to maintain body weight over a minimal normal weight for age
   and height

   E. No known physical illness that would account for the weight loss.

 307.51 Bulimia
The essential features are episodic binge eating accompanied by an awareness
that the eating pattern is abnormal, fear of not being able to stop eating volun-
tarily, and depressed mood and self-deprecating thoughts following the eating
binges. The bulimic episodes are not due to Anorexia Nervosa or any known
physical disorder.
    Eating binges may be planned. The food consumed during a binge often has
a high caloric content, a sweet taste, and a texture that facilitates rapid eating.
The food is usually eaten as inconspicuously as possible, or secretly. The food
is usually gobbled down quite rapidly, with little chewing. Once eating has
begun, additional food may be sought to continue the binge, and often there is
a feeling of loss of control or inability to stop eating. A binge is usually termi-
nated by abdominal pain, sleep, social interruption, or induced vomiting. Vomit-
ing decreases the physical pain of abdominal distention, allowing either con-
tinued eating or termination of the binge, and often reduces post-binge anguish.


70 Diagnostic Categories

Although eating binges may be pleasurable, disparaging self-criticism and a de-
pressed mood follow.
    Individuals with Bulimia usually exhibit great concern about their weight
and make repeated attempts to control it by dieting, vomiting, or the use of
cathartics or diuretics. Frequent weight fluctuations due to alternating binges and
fasts are common. Often these individuals feel that their life is dominated by
conflicts about eating.

    Associated features. Although most individuals with Bulimia are within a
normal weight range, some may be slightly underweight and others may be
overweight. Some individuals are subject to intermittent Substance Abuse, most
frequently of barbiturates, amphetamines, or alcohol. Individuals may manifest
undue concern with body image and appearance, often related to sexual attrac-
tiveness, with a focus on how others will see and react to them.

    Age at onset. The disorder usually begins in adolescence or early adult life.

    Sex ratio. The disorder occurs predominantly in females.

    Course. The usual course is chronic and intermittent over a period of many
years. Usually the binges alternate with periods of normal eating, or with periods
of normal eating and fasts. In extreme cases, however, there may be alternate
binges and fasts with no periods of normal eating.

    Familial pattern. No information, although frequently obesity is present in
parents or siblings.

    Impairment and complications. Bulimia is seldom incapacitating except in a
few individuals who spend their entire day in binge eating and self-induced
vomiting. Electrolyte imbalance and dehydration can occur in those below nor-
mal weight who vomit after binges.

    Prevalence and predisposing factors. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. In Anorexia Nervosa there is severe weight loss, but
in Bulimia the weight fluctuations are never so extreme as to be life-threatening.
In Schizophrenia there may be unusual eating behavior, but the full syndrome of
Bulimia is rarely present; when it is, both diagnoses should be given. In
certain neurological diseases, such as epileptic equivalent seizures, CNS tumors,
Kliiver-Bucy-like syndromes, and Klein-Levin syndrome, there are abnormal eat-
ing patterns, but the diagnosis Bulimia is rarely warranted; when it is, both diag-
noses should be given.

  Diagnostic criteria for Bulimia
  A. Recurrent episodes of binge eating (rapid consumption of a large
  amount of food in a discrete period of time, usually less than two hours).


                       Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 71

   B. At least three of the following:

       (1) consumption of high-caloric, easily ingested food during a binge
       (2) inconspicuous eating during a binge
       (3) termination of such eating episodes by abdominal pain, sleep,
       social interruption, or self-induced vomiting
       (4) repeated attempts to lose weight by severely restrictive diets,
       self-induced vomiting, or use of cathartics or diuretics
       (5) frequent weight fluctuations greater than ten pounds due to
       alternating binges and fasts

   C. Awareness that the eating pattern is abnormal and fear of not being
   able to stop eating voluntarily.

   D. Depressed mood and self-deprecating thoughts following eating
   binges.

   E. The bulimic episodes are not due to Anorexia Nervosa or any known
   physical disorder.

 307.52 Pica
 The essential feature is the persistent eating of a nonnutritive substance. Infants
 with the disorder typically eat paint, plaster, string, hair, or cloth. Older children
 may eat animal droppings, sand, bugs, leaves, or pebbles. There is no aversion
 to food.

    Associated features. There are no regularly associated features.

    Age at onset. Age at onset is usually from 12 to 24 months, but may be
earlier.

    Course. Pica usually remits in early childhood, but may persist into adoles-
cence or, rarely, continue through adulthood.

    Impairment. None.

    Complications. Lead poisoning may result from the ingestion of paint or
paint-soaked plaster; hairball tumors may cause intestinal obstruction.

    Predisposing factors. Mental Retardation, mineral deficiency (e.g., of zinc or
iron), neglect, and poor supervision may be predisposing factors.

    Prevalence and sex ratio. Pica is a rare disorder, and is reported equally for
both sexes.


72 Diagnostic Categories

    Familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. In Infantile Autism, Schizophrenia, and certain physi-
cal disorders, such as Klein-Levin syndrome, nonnutritive substances may be
eaten. In such instances Pica should not be noted as an additional diagnosis.

  Diagnostic criteria for Pica
  A. Repeated eating of a nonnutritive substance for at least one month.

  B. Not due to another mental disorder, such as Infantile Autism or
  Schizophrenia, or a physical disorder, such as Klein-Levin Syndrome.

307.53 Rumination Disorder of Infancy
The essential feature is repeated regurgitation of food, with weight loss or fail-
ure to gain expected weight, developing after a period of normal functioning.
Partially digested food is brought up into the mouth without nausea, retching,
disgust, or associated gastrointestinal disorder. The food is then ejected from the
mouth or chewed and reswallowed. A characteristic position of straining and
arching the back with the head held back is observed. Sucking movements of the
tongue occur, and the infant gives the impression of gaining considerable satis-
faction from the activity.

    Associated features. Commonly there are irritability and hunger between
episodes of regurgitation.

    Age at onset. The disorder usually starts between 3 and 12 months of age.
In children with Mental Retardation, it occasionally begins later.

    Course. The disorder is potentially fatal. A mortality rate from malnutrition
as high as 25% has been reported. In severe cases, although the infant is appar-
ently hungry and ingests large amounts of food, progressive malnutrition occurs
because regurgitation immediately follows the feedings. Spontaneous remissions
are thought to be common.

    Impairment. If failure to gain expected weight or severe malnutrition devel-
ops, developmental delays in all spheres often occur, and impairment can be
severe.

    Complications. A frequent complication of this disorder is that the caretaker
becomes discouraged by failure to feed the infant successfully, and becomes
alienated from the child. The noxious odor of the regurgitated material also leads
to avoidance of the infant by the caretaker, with resulting understimulation.

    Predisposing factors and familial pattern. No information.


                      Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 73

    Prevalence. The disorder is apparently very rare.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is equally common in boys and in girls.

    Differential diagnosis. Congenital anomalies, such as pyloric stenosis, or in-
fections of the gastrointestinal system, can cause regurgitation of food and need
to be ruled out by appropriate physical examination.

  Diagnostic criteria for Rumination Disorder of Infancy
  A. Repeated regurgitation without nausea or associated gastrointestina!
  illness for at least one month following a period of normal functioning.

  B. Weight loss or failure to make expected weight gain.

307.50 Atypical Eating Disorder
This category is a residual category for eating disorders that cannot be ade-
quately classified in any of the previous categories.

STEREOTYPED MOVEMENT DISORDERS
The essential feature of disorders in this subclass is an abnormality of gross
motor movement. The specific Stereotyped Movement Disorders all involve tics
and include Transient Tic Disorder, Chronic Motor Tic Disorder, and Tourette's
Disorder. It is unknown whether the three tic disorders represent distinct condi-
tions or a continuum of severity.

    Differential diagnosis of tics. A tic is defined as an involuntary rapid move-
ment of a functionally related group of skeletal muscles or the involuntary pro-
duction of noises or words. Tics should be distinguished from other movement
disturbances. Choreiform movements are dancing, random, irregular, nonrepeti-
tive movements. Dystonic movements are slower, twisting movements inter-
spersed with prolonged states of muscular tension. Athetoid movements are
slow, irregular, writhing movements, most frequently in the fingers and toes.
Myoclonic movements are brief, shocklike muscle contractions that may affect
parts of or a whole muscle, but not entire muscle groups. Hemiballismic move-
ments are intermittent, coarse, jumping, and unilateral movements of the limbs.
Spasms are stereotypic, slower, and more prolonged than tics, and involve
groups of muscles. Hemifacial spasm consists of irregular, repetitive, unilateral
jerks of facial muscles. Synkinesis consists of movements of the corner of the
mouth when the individual intends to close the eye, and its converse. Dyski-
nesias, such as tardive dyskinesia, are silent, oral-buccal-lingual, masticatory
movements in the face and choreoathetoid movements in the limbs. The term
"stereotyped movement," which is here used as a diagnostic term, refers to a
voluntary, brief or prolonged habit or mannerism that often is experienced as
pleasurable. (See Atypical Stereotyped Movement Disorder, p. 77.)


74 Diagnostic Categories

    Associated features of Tic Disorders. Shame and self-consciousness are
common, especially with Tourette's Disorder.

    Impairment in Tic Disorders. Social and occupational functioning may be
impaired owing to social ostracism or the interference in normal functioning
caused by the tics.

307.21 Transient Tic Disorder
The essential features are recurrent involuntary, repetitive, rapid movements
(tics). The movements can be voluntarily suppressed for minutes to hours. The
intensity of the symptoms varies over weeks or months. The onset is during
childhood or adolescence. The duration is at least one month, but not more than
one year.
    The most common tic is an eye blink or another facial tic. However, the
whole head, torso, or limbs may be involved. In addition, there may be vocal
tics. An individual may have only one or a number of tics; if the latter, the tics
may be performed simultaneously, sequentially, or randomly.
    Tics are exacerbated by stress or anticipation. They disappear during sleep,
and may become attenuated during some absorbing activities. The individual
may be successful in temporarily suppressing the tics; eventually, however, the
tics reappear. From week to week or month to month, the strength and frequency
of the tics will change.

    Age at onset. The age at onset is always during childhood or early adoles-
cence, and may be as early as two years of age.

    Course. The tics may disappear permanently, or recur, especially during
periods of stress. In rare cases, after a period of partial remission, the individual
may develop Tourette's Disorder.

    Complications and predisposing factors. No information.

    Prevalence. Surveys of schoolchildren have reported that from 12% to
24% of the children have had a history of some kind of tic. However, since these
surveys do not specify a minimum or a maximum duration, it is not known how
applicable these findings are to the prevalence of Tic Disorders as defined in this
manual.

    Sex ratio. Most studies find the disorder three times as common in boys as
 in girls.

    Familial pattern. Tics are apparently more common in family members than
in the general population.

     Differential diagnosis. In Tourette's Disorder and Chronic Motor Tic Dis-
 order the duration of the disturbance is at least one year. In Tourette's Disorder
 there are vocal tics which are rarely present in Transient Tic Disorder. See
differential diagnosis of tics (p. 73) and Tourette's Disorder (p. 77).


                       Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 75

   Diagnostic criteria for Transient Tic Disorder
   A. Onset during childhood or early adolescence.

   B. Presence of recurrent, involuntary, repetitive, rapid, purposeless, motor
   movements (tics).

   C Ability to suppress the movements voluntarily for minutes to hours.

   D. Variation in the intensity of the symptoms over weeks or months.

   E. Duration of at least one month but not more than one year.

 307.22 Chronic Motor Tic Disorder
 The essential features are recurrent, involuntary, repetitive, rapid movements
 (tics), usually involving no more than three muscle groups at any one time. The
 movements can be voluntarily suppressed for minutes to hours. The intensity
 of the symptoms is constant over weeks or months, and the duration is at least
 one year. Vocal tics occur infrequently. When present, they are not loud, intense
 or noticeable; frequently they are grunts or other noises caused by thoracic,
 abdominal, or diaphragmatic contractions.

     Age at onset. The age at onset appears to be either in childhood or after
 age 40. When the onset is in adult life, the tic tends to be limited to a single
 muscle group.

     Course. The course tends to be chronic.

    Complications, predisposing factors, sex ratio, familial pattern and prev-
 alence. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. In Transient Tic Disorder the tics vary in intensity
 over time and the duration of the disturbance is always less than one year.
In Tourette's Disorder the intensity of the tics varies over time, vocal tics are
prominent and the motor movements are weaker and of briefer duration. See
differential diagnosis of tics (p. 73) and Tourette's Disorder (p. 77).

  Diagnostic criteria ior Chronic Motor Tic Disorder
  A. Presence of recurrent, involuntary, repetitive, rapid, purposeless move-
  ments (tics) involving no more than three muscle groups at any one
  time.

  B. Unvarying intensity of the tics over weeks or months.

  C. Ability to suppress the movements voluntarily for minutes to hours.

  D. Duration of at least one year.


76 Diagnostic Categories

307.23 Tourette's Disorder
The essential features are recurrent, involuntary, repetitive, rapid movements
(tics), including multiple vocal tics. The movements can be voluntarily sup-
pressed for minutes to hours; and the intensity, frequency, and location of the
symptoms vary over weeks or months.
    The tics typically involve the head and, frequently, other parts of the body,
such as the torso and upper and lower limbs. The vocal tics include various
sounds such as clicks, grunts, yelps, barks, sniffs, and coughs, or words.
Coprolalia, an irresistible urge to utter obscenities, is present in 60% of the cases.
All of the symptoms are exacerbated by stress. They disappear, however, during
sleep, and may become attenuated during some absorbing activities. Although the
tics can be voluntarily suppressed, they eventually reappear.

    Associated features. There may be other symptoms, such as echokinesis
(imitation of the movements of someone who is being observed), palilalia (repe-
tition of one's own last words or phrases), mental coprolalia (thinking about
curse words), obsessive thoughts of doubting, and compulsive impulses to touch
things or to perform complicated movements, such as squatting, deep knee
bends, retracing steps, and twirling when walking.
  Nonspecific EEG abnormalities, soft neurological signs, central nervous sys-
tem psychological test abnormalities, hyperactivity or perceptual problems dur-
ing infancy and childhood, or organic stigmata occur in about half the indi-
viduals with the disorder.

    Age at onset. The disorder may appear as early as 2 years of age, and
almost always appears before the age of 13.

    Course. The disorder is usually lifelong, though brief periods of remission
may occur. In some cases the disorder disappears before adulthood.
    In approximately half the cases, the first symptom to appear is a single tic,
most frequently an eye blink, less frequently a tic of another part of the face
or the body. Initial symptoms also include tongue protrusion, squatting, sniffing,
hopping, skipping, throat clearing, stuttering, uttering sounds or words, and
coprolalia. Other cases begin with multiple symptoms, which may include any
combination of the previously described tics and various noises such as barks,
grunts, screams, yelps, or snorts.

    Complications. In rare cases suicide may be a complication, because of
despair over the disruptive effect of the disorder on social and occupational
functioning.

    Predisposing factors. There are no known predisposing factors. The dis-
order is unrelated to social class, or history of other mental disorders in the
family or in the individual.

    Prevalence. The estimated lifetime prevalence rate ranges from 0.1 to 0.5
per thousand.


                       Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 77

     Sex ratio. The disorder is three times more common in boys than in girls.

     Familial pattern. Tics of various kinds are apparently more common among
 family members than in the general population.

    Differential diagnosis. See differential diagnosis of tics, page 73. Ampheta-
 mine Intoxication, cerebrovascular accidents, Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, Wilson's
 disease, Sydenham's and Huntington's chorea, multiple sclerosis, Schizophrenia,
 general paresis, and Organic Mental Disorders may present with abnormal
 motor movements. These disorders can readily be distinguished from Tic Dis-
 orders because they have distinguishing symptoms, signs, clinical course, and
 physiological abnormalities as revealed by laboratory tests; and none of them
 have vocalizations similar to the clicks, grunts, yelps, barks, sniffs, coughs, and
 words of Tourette's Disorder.

   Diagnostic criteria for Tourette's Disorder
  A. Age at onset between 2 and 15 years.

  B. Presence of recurrent, involuntary, repetitive, rapid, purposeless motor
   movements affecting multiple muscle groups.

  C. Multiple vocal tics.

   D. Ability to suppress movements voluntarily for minutes to hours.

  E. Variations in the intensity of the symptoms over weeks or months,

  F. Duration of more than one year.

307.20 Atypical Tic Disorder
This category is for the diagnosis of tics that cannot be adequately classified in
any of the previous categories.

307.30 Atypical Stereotyped Movement Disorder
This category is for conditions such as head banging, rocking, repetitive hand
movements consisting of quick, rhythmic, small hand rotations, or repetitive
voluntary movements that typically involve the fingers or arms. These disorders
are distinguishable from tics in that they consist of voluntary movements and
are not spasmodic. Moreover, unlike individuals with a Tic Disorder, those with
these conditions are not distressed by the symptoms and may even appear to
derive enjoyment from the repetitive activities. Though bizarre posturing or
movements may occur in adults, these conditions are found almost exclusively
in children. They are especially prevalent among individuals with Mental Re-
tardation or Pervasive Developmental Disorders and among children suffering
from grossly inadequate social stimulation, but they may also occur in the
absence of a concurrent mental disorder.


 78 Diagnostic Categories

OTHER DISORDERS WITH PHYSICAL MANIFESTATIONS
This subclass of disorders includes categories in which the predominant dis-
turbance is in a physical function: Stuttering (speech), Functional Enuresis and
Functional Encopresis (urination and defecation), Sleepwalking Disorder and
 Sleep Terror Disorder (sleep). The inclusion of these categories in a classification
 of mental disorders is justified partly by tradition in that, formerly, psychological
 conflict was thought to play a central role in all of these disorders and it was
 thought that these conditions were almost always associated with other signs of
 psychopathology. Recently, however, many have come to question these assump-
 tions, at least with regard to some of these categories. Further, there is evidence
 that most of the children with these disorders do not have associated mental
 disorder.

 307.00 Stuttering
 The essential features are frequent repetitions or prolongations of sounds, sylla-
 bles, or words, or frequent, unusual hesitations and pauses that disrupt the
 rhythmic flow of speech. The extent of the disturbance varies from situation to
 situation and is most severe when there is special pressure to communicate, as
 during a job interview.
     Speech may be very rapid or very slow, and there may be inappropriate in-
 flection or lack of variation in pitch. In even the most severe cases, Stuttering
 is often absent during oral reading, singing, or talking to inanimate objects or to
 pets.
     Stammering is a synonym for Stuttering.

     Associated features. In moderate or severe cases there is vivid, fearful an-
 ticipation of stuttering with avoidance of particular sounds, words, or situations
 in which stuttering is anticipated. In addition, there may be eye blinks, tics,
 tremors of the lips or jaw, or jerking of the head.

     Age at onset. Stuttering usually appears before the age of 12, with sharp
 peaks of onset between the ages of 2 to 3l/z and 5 to 7 years.

     Course. Typically the disturbance starts gradually with repetition of initial
 consonants, whole words that are usually the first words of a phrase, or long
 words. The child is generally not aware of the stuttering. As the disorder pro-
 gresses, the repetitions become more frequent, and the stuttering occurs on the
 most important words of phrases. The child becomes aware of the speech diffi-
 culty, and in certain situations some words and sounds become more difficult.
     The usual course is chronic, with periods of partial remission extending for
 weeks or months and exacerbations that occur most frequently when there is
 particular pressure to communicate. Between 50% and 80% of children with the
 disorder recover spontaneously; this is most likely in mild cases.

     Impairment. Teasing and social ostracism by peers may result in impair-
 ment in peer relations. The child may have academic difficulties if he or she
 avoids speaking in class.


                       Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 79

    Complications. Limitation in occupational choice or advancement is the
principal complication.

    Predisposing factors. No information.

    Prevalence. Approximately 1% of all children have a persistent problem
 with Stuttering that continues into adolescence.

     Sex ratio. The disorder is about four times more common in males than in
 females.

     Familial pattern. Stuttering is more common among family members than in
 the general population.

     Differential diagnosis. Spastic dysphonia, a stuttering-like speech disorder,
 is distinguished from Stuttering by the presence of an abnormal pattern of
 breathing.
     Cluttering, in which there is such a rapid rate of speech that fluency breaks
 down, may suggest Stuttering, but in cluttering the individual is usually un-
 aware of the disturbance, whereas in Stuttering, after the initial phase, the indi-
 vidual is painfully aware of the disturbance.

   Diagnostic criteria for Stuttering
       Frequent repetitions or prolongations of sounds, syllables, or words
   or frequent, unusual hesitations and pauses that disrupt the rhythmic flow
   of speech.

 307.60 Functional Enuresis
 The essential feature is repeated involuntary voiding of urine during the day
 or at night, after an age at which continence is expected, that is not due to any
 physical disorder. The disorder is somewhat arbitrarily defined as involuntary
 voiding of urine at least twice a month for children between the ages of five and
 six and once a month for older children.
     Functional Enuresis is often referred to as primary if it has not been pre-
 ceded by a period of urinary continence for at least one year, and secondary if
 it has been preceded by a period of urinary continence for at least one year.
 Either of the above types may be nocturnal (most common), defined as the
 passage of urine during sleep time only, diurnal, defined as the passage of urine
 during waking hours, or both diurnal and nocturnal. There is no provision for
 coding these distinctions.
     In most cases of nocturnal Functional Enuresis, the child awakens with no
 memory of a dream and no memory of having urinated because typically the dis-
 turbance occurs during the first third of the night, during non-REM sleep. How-
 ever, in a few cases the voiding takes place during the rapid eye movement
 (REM) stage of sleep, and in such cases the child may recall a dream that
 involved the act of urinating.


80 Diagnostic Categories

     Associated features. Very often the individual feels ashamed or embarrassed
and may wish to avoid situations that might lead to embarrassment, such as
camp or overnight visits to friends. Although the great majority of children with
Functional Enuresis do not have a coexisting mental disorder, the prevalence of
coexisting mental disorders is greater in individuals with Functional Enuresis
than in the general population.
     Functional Encopresis, Sleepwalking Disorder, and Sleep Terror Disorder
may also be present.

     Course. Most children with the disorder eventually become continent by
adolescence, but in some cases the disorder continues into adulthood.

     Age at onset. Primary Functional Enuresis by definition begins by age five.
Most cases of secondary Functional Enuresis have their onset between the ages
of five and eight.

     Impairment. The amount of impairment is primarily a function of the effect
on the individual's self-esteem, the degree of social ostracism by peers, and
anger, punishment, and rejection from caretakers.

     Complications. A complication is ascending urinary infection (particularly in
girls).

     Predisposing factors. These include delay in the development of the sup-
porting musculature of the bladder, impaired ability of the bladder to adapt to
 urinary filling without changes in intravesical pressure with a lower bladder vol-
ume threshold for involuntary voiding, delayed or lax toilet training, and psy-
 chosocial stress (particularly hospitalization between the ages of two and four,
 entering school, and the birth of a sibling).

     Prevalence and sex ratio. The prevalence of Functional Enuresis as defined
 here is: at age 5, 7% for boys, and 3% for girls; at age 10, 3% for boys, and
 2% for girls; and at age 18, 1% for boys, and almost nonexistent for girls.

     Familial pattern. Approximately 75% of all children with Functional Enure-
 sis have a first-degree relative who has or has had the disorder. The concor-
 dance for the disorder is greater in monozygotic than in dizygotic twins.

     Differential diagnosis. Organic causes of enuresis such as diabetes and sei-
 zure disorder should be ruled out by appropriate physical examination.

   Diagnostic criteria for Functional Enuresis
   A. Repeated involuntary voiding of urine by day or at night
   B. At least two such events per month for children between the ages of
   five and six, and at least one event per month for older children.
   C. Not due to a physical disorder, such as diabetes or a seizure disorder.


                      Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 81

307.70 Functional Encopresis
The essential feature is repeated voluntary or involuntary passage of feces of
normal or near-normal consistency into places not appropriate for that purpose
in the individual's own sociocultural setting, not due to any physical disorder.
    Functional Encopresis is generally referred to as primary if it occurs after
the child has reached the age of four and has not been preceded by fecal con-
tinence for at least one year and secondary if it has been preceded by a period
of fecal continence for at least one year. There is no provision for recording the
primary-secondary distinction. When the passage of feces in Functional Enco-
presis is involuntary rather than deliberate, it is often related to constipation,
impaction, or retention with subsequent overflow. In such cases there often is
soiling of clothes shortly after bathing because of reflex stimulation.

    Associated features. Very often the individual feels ashamed or embarrassed
and may wish to avoid situations that might lead to embarrassment, such as
camp or overnight visits to friends. When the incontinence is clearly deliberate,
antisocial and other psychopathological features are common. Smearing feces
may be deliberate, and should be differentiated from smearing that takes place
accidentally in the child's attempt to clear or hide feces passed involuntarily.
Twenty-five percent of children with Functional Encopresis also have Functional
Enuresis.

    Course. Functional Encopresis rarely becomes chronic.

    Age at onset. By definition primary Functional Encopresis begins by age
four. Secondary Functional Encopresis usually begins between the ages of four
and eight.

    Impairment. The amount of impairment is primarily a function of the effect
on the individual's self-esteem, the degree of social ostracism by peers, and
anger, punishment, and rejection from caretakers.

    Complications. None.

    Predisposing factors. These include inadequate, inconsistent toilet training
and psychosocial stress, such as entering school and the birth of a sibling.

    Prevalence. It is estimated that approximately 1% of five-year-olds have the
disorder. Primary Functional Encopresis apparently is more frequent in the lower
socioeconomic classes.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is more common in males than in females.

    Familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. Functional Encopresis must be differentiated from
structural organic causes of encopresis, such as aganglionic megacolon and anal
fissure, which need to be ruled out by physical examination.


82 Diagnostic Categories

  Diagnostic criteria for Functional Encopresis
  A. Repeated voluntary or involuntary passage of feces of normal or near-
  normal consistency into places not appropriate for that purpose in the
  individual's own sociocultural setting.

  B. At least one such event a month after the age of four.

  C. Not due to a physical disorder, such as aganglionic megacolon.

307.46 Sleepwalking Disorder
The essential features are repeated episodes of a sequence of complex behaviors
that frequently, though not always, progress—without full consciousness or
later memory of the episode—to leaving bed and walking about. The episode
usually occurs between 30 and 200 minutes after onset of sleep (the interval of
nonrapid eye movement [NREM] sleep that typically contains EEG delta activ-
ity, sleep stages 3 and 4) and lasts from a few minutes to about a half hour.
    During a typical epsiode the individual sits up and carries out perseverative
motor movements, such as picking at the blanket, and then performs semi-
purposeful motor acts, which, in addition to walking, may include dressing,
opening doors, eating, and going to the bathroom. The episode may terminate
before the walking stage is reached.
    During the episode the individual has a blank, staring face and is relatively
unresponsive to the efforts of others to influence the sleepwalking or to com-
municate with him or her, and can be awakened only with great difficulty. Dur-
ing sleepwalking, coordination is poor; but the individual is able to see and
walks around objects in his or her path. It is a myth that during sleepwalking
the individual is careful and safe; in fact, he or she can stumble or lose balance
and be injured by taking hazardous routes such as through windows or down
fire escapes.
    The walking behavior may terminate spontaneously by awakening fol-
lowed by several minutes of disorientation. On the other hand, the individual
may return to bed without ever reaching consciousness, or may lie down in
another place to continue sleep, though mystified the next morning to find
himself or herself there.
    Upon awakening (either from the sleepwalking episode or the next morn-
ing), there is amnesia for the route traversed and what happened during the
episode. Fragmentary dream images may be recalled, but not complete dream
sequences.
    Sleep EEG slow waves usually increase in amplitude in stage 4 sleep just
preceding the episode; but EEG flattening, i.e., arousal, may occur before the
episode. In the usual instance, as walking ensues, the high amplitude, slow wave
pattern gives way to an admixture of NREM stages and lower amplitude EEG
alpha activity.
    Episodes are more likely if the individual is fatigued, has experienced a
stress, or has taken a bedtime dose of a sedative or hypnotic substance.


                      Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 83

    Associated features. Frenzied behavior or aggression to persons or objects
is infrequent. Sleeptalking may occur during sleepwalking, but articulation is
poor; dialogue is rare.
    Individuals with Sleepwalking Disorder have a higher than normal inci-
dence of other episodic disorders associated with deep NREM sleep, such as
nocturnal Functional Enuresis and Sleep Terror Disorder. There is no consis-
tently associated psychopathology in children with this disorder. In contrast,
adults with the disorder frequently do show evidence of other mental disorders,
such as Personality Disorders.

    Age at onset. Sleepwalking Disorder usually begins between ages 6 and 12.
Adults who sleepwalk give a history of childhood episodes, then a period of
remission until recurrence in the 20s and 30s.

    Course. Sleepwalking usually lasts several years in children and adoles-
cents, whether it occurs infrequently or nightly. The great majority of children
or adolescents with the disorder are asymptomatic by their 20s; the disturbance
tends to be more chronic in adults.

    Impairment. Impairment is limited to avoidance of situations in which
others might become aware of the disturbance, such as camp or overnight visits
to friends.

    Complications. Accidental injury during the episodes is the major complica-
tion.

    Predisposing factors. Seizure disorders, CNS infections, and trauma are
predisposing factors.

    Prevalence. It is estimated that l%-6% of children at some time have the
disorder. As many as 15% of all children experience isolated episodes. Sleep-
walking Disorder is rarer in adults.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is apparently more common in males than in fe-
males.

    Familial pattern. The disorder is more common among family members
than in the general population. Family members of individuals with Sleepwalk-
ing Disorder tend to be deep sleepers.

    Differential diagnosis. Psychomotor epileptic seizures may occur at night
and produce episodes of perseverative behaviors similar to sleepwalking except
that the individuals almost never return to their own beds. Also, during epileptic
attacks there is total unreactivity to environmental stimuli, and perseverative
motor movements such as swallowing and rubbing the hands are more common.
Individuals with seizure disorders generally manifest such behaviors in the
waking state as well, and the activity is associated with recordable seizure
discharge. However, seizure disorders do not preclude coexisting Sleepwalking
Disorder.


 84 Diagnostic Categories

     Psychogenic Fugues are distinguishable from Sleepwalking Disorder on
 several counts: Psychogenic Fugues are rare in children, typically begin in
 wakefulness, have a duration of hours or days, are not characterized by dis-
 turbances of consciousness, and are usually associated with other evidence of
 severe psychopathology.
     Sleep drunkenness (prolonged transition to a clear consciousness after
 awakening) may resemble Sleepwalking Disorder except for the former's ap-
 pearance in the morning and high frequency of aggressive behavior.

   Diagnostic criteria for Sleepwalking Disorder
   A. There are repeated episodes of arising from bed during sleep and
   walking about for several minutes to a half hour, usually occurring
   between 30 and 200 minutes after onset of sleep (the interval of sleep
   that typically contains EEC delta activity, sleep stages 3 and 4).

   B. While sleepwalking, the individual has a blank, staring face; is relatively
   unresponsive to the efforts of others to influence the sleepwalking or to
   communicate with him or her; and can be wakened only with great
   difficulty.

   C. Upon awakening (either from the sleeping episode or the next morn-
   ing), the individual has amnesia for the route traversed and for what hap-
   pened during the episode.

   D. Within several minutes of awakening from the sleepwalking episode,
   there is no impairment of mental activity or behavior (although there may
   initially be a short period of confusion or disorientation).

   E. There is no evidence that the episode occurred during REM sleep or
   that there is abnormal electrical brain activity during sleep.

 307.46 Sleep Terror Disorder
The essential features are repeated episodes of abrupt awakening from sleep,
usually beginning with a panicky scream. The episode usually occurs between
30 and 200 minutes after onset of sleep (the interval of nonrapid eye movement
 [NREM] sleep that typically contains EEC delta activity, sleep stages 3 and 4),
and lasts 1 to 10 minutes. This condition has also been called Pavor Nocturnus.
    During a typical episode, the individual sits up in bed with intense anxiety
and displays agitated and perseverative motor movements (such as picking at
the blanket), a frightened expression, dilated pupils, profuse perspiration, pilo-
erection,-rapid breathing, and quick pulse. An individual in this state is un-
responsive to efforts of others to comfort him or her until the agitation and
confusion subside. The individual may then recount having had a sense of terror
and fragmentary dream images before arousal, but rarely a vivid and complete
dream sequence. Morning amnesia for the entire episode is the rule. Episodes are


                      Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 85

more likely if the individual is fatigued, has experienced a stress, or has taken
a bedtime dose of a tricyclic antidepressant or neuroleptic.
    Prior to a severe episode, the sleep EEG delta waves may be higher in
amplitude than usual for the NREM phase of sleep, and breathing and heart-
beat, slower. The onset of the episode is accompanied by a twofold to fourfold
increase in heart rate, and the EEG quickly assumes an alpha pattern.

    Associated features. There is no consistently associated psychopathology in
children with this disorder. In contrast, adults with the disorder frequently do
show evidence of other mental disorders, such as Generalized Anxiety Disorder.

    Age at onset. Sleep Terror Disorder usually begins between ages 4 and 12.
When the disorder begins in adulthood, it usually begins in the 20s or 30s;
onset after 40 is rare.

    Course. Episodes are extremely variable in frequency both within and
among individuals, and usually occur at intervals of days or weeks, but may
occur on consecutive nights. In children the disorder usually gradually disap-
pears in early adolescence. When the disorder begins in adulthood, the course
is often chronic.

    Impairment. Impairment is limited to avoidance of situations in which
others might become aware of the disturbance, such as camp or overnight visits
to friends.

    Complications. None.

    Predisposing factors. No information.

    Prevalence. It is estimated that 1% to 4% of children at some time have
the disorder. A much greater proportion of children experience isolated episodes.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is more common in males than in females.

    Familial pattern. The disorder is apparently more common among family
members than in the general population.

    Differential diagnosis. REM sleep nightmares are distinguished from Sleep
Terror Disorder by their appearance in the middle and latter thirds of the night,
the milder anxiety experience, the absence of a panicky scream upon awaken-
ing, and the distinct recall of a detailed dream sequence in which a growing
threat leads to awakening. Parents may misinterpret the fearfulness and frag-
mentary imagery reports of Sleep Terror Disorder as indicative of a REM sleep
nightmare. Hypnagogic hallucinations may be associated with anxiety, but occur
at onset of sleep and are vivid images at the transition from wakefulness to
sleep. Epileptic seizures during sleep with postictal confusion may present a
clinical picture similar to Sleep Terror Disorder, but the presence of epileptic
seizures in the waking state or the presence of an abnormal sleep EEG rules out
a diagnosis of Sleep Terror Disorder.


86 Diagnostic Categories

  Diagnostic criteria lor Sleep Terror Disorder
  A. Repeated episodes of abrupt awakening (lasting 1-10 minutes) from
  sleep, usually occurring between 30 and 200 minutes after onset of sleep
  (the interval of sleep that typically contains EEC delta activity, sleep stages
  3 and 4) and usually beginning with a panicky scream,

  B. Intense anxiety during the episode and at least three of the following
  signs of autonornic arousal:

      (1) tachycardia
      (2) rapid breathing
      (3) dilated pupils
      (4) sweating
      (5) piloerection

  C. Relative unresponsiveness to efforts of others to comfort the individual
  during the episode and, almost invariably, confusion, disorientation, and
  perseverative motor movements (e.g., picking at pillow).

  D. No evidence that the episode occurred during REM sleep or of ab-
  normal electrical brain activity during sleep.

PERVASIVE DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS
The disorders in this subclass are characterized by distortions in the develop-
ment of multiple basic psychological functions that are involved in the develop-
ment of social skills and language, such as attention, perception, reality testing,
and motor movement.
    In the past, children with these disorders have been described by many
terms: Atypical Children, Symbiotic Psychotic Children, Childhood Schizo-
phrenia, and others. Since these disorders apparently bear little relationship to
the psychotic disorders of adult life, the term "psychosis" has not been used
here in the name of this group of conditions. The term Pervasive Devel-
opmental Disorder has been selected because it describes most accurately the
core clinical disturbance: many basic areas of psychological development are
affected at the same time and to a severe degree.
    Pervasive Developmental Disorders differ from the Specific Developmental
Disorders in two basic ways. First, only a single specific function is affected in
each Specific Developmental Disorder whereas in Pervasive Developmental Dis-
orders multiple functions are always affected. Second, in Specific Developmental
Disorders the children behave as if they are passing through an earlier normal
developmental stage, because the disturbance is a delay in development, whereas
children with Pervasive Developmental Disorders display severe qualitative ab-
normalities that are not normal for any stage of development, because the dis-
turbance is a distortion in development.
    The fifth digit should be used for all of the Pervasive Developmental Dis-
orders to indicate whether the full syndrome is currently present (code=0) or


                      Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 87

whether the full syndrome occurred previously, but now the individual has only
residual symptoms of the disorder, such as blunted or inappropriate affect, so-
cial withdrawal, or eccentric behavior (code=l).
    The ICD-9 category Disintegrative Psychosis is not included in this classi-
fication since the disorder apparently is a nonspecific Organic Brain Syndrome
that consists of a Dementia plus other behavioral abnormalities, such as rapid
loss of language and social skills. Such cases should be diagnosed as Dementia.

299.0x Infantile Autism
The essential features are a lack of responsiveness to other people (autism),
gross impairment in communicative skills, and bizarre responses to various
aspects of the environment, all developing within the first 30 months of age.
Infantile Autism may be associated with known organic conditions, such as
maternal rubella or phenylketonuria. In such cases the behavioral syndrome In-
fantile Autism should be recorded on Axis I, and the physical disorder, on
Axis III.
    The relationship of this category to Schizophrenia is controversial. Some be-
lieve that Infantile Autism is the earliest form of Schizophrenia, whereas others
believe that they are two distinct conditions. However, there is apparently no
increased incidence of Schizophrenia in the families of children with Infantile
Autism, which supports the hypothesis that the two disorders are unrelated.
    The failure to develop interpersonal relationships is characterized by a lack
of responsiveness to and a lack of interest in people, with a concomitant failure
to develop normal attachment behavior. In infancy these deficiencies may be
manifested by a failure to cuddle, by lack of eye contact and facial responsive-
ness, and by indifference or aversion to affection and physical contact. As a re-
sult, parents often suspect that the child is deaf. Adults may be treated as inter-
changeable, or the child may cling mechanically to a specific individual.
    In early childhood there is invariably failure to develop cooperative play
and friendships; but, as the children grow older, greater awareness of and at-
tachment to parents and other familiar adults often develop. Some of the least
handicapped may eventually reach a stage where they can become passively in-
volved in other children's games or physical play such as running with other
children. This apparent sociability is superficial, however, and can be a source
of diagnostic confusion if mistaken for social relatedness when the diagnosis is
made retrospectively.
    Impairment in communication includes both verbal and nonverbal skills.
Language may be totally absent. When it develops, it is often characterized by:
immature grammatical structure, delayed or immediate echolalia, pronominal
reversals (use of the pronoun "you" when "I" is the intended meaning), nomi-
nal aphasia (inability to name objects), inability to use abstract terms, meta-
phorical language (utterances whose usage is idiosyncratic and whose meaning
is not clear), and abnormal speech melody, such as questionlike rises at ends of
statements. Appropriate nonverbal communication, such as socially appropriate
facial expressions and gestures, is often lacking.
    Bizarre responses to the environment may take several forms. There may be
resistance and even catastrophic reactions to minor changes in the environment,


88 Diagnostic Categories

e.g., the child may scream when his or her place at the dinner table is changed.
There is often attachment to odd objects, e.g., the child insists on always carry-
ing a string or rubber band. Ritualistic behavior may involve motor acts, such as
hand clapping or repetitive peculiar hand movements, or insisting that fixed
sequences of events precede going to bed. The fascination with movement may
be exemplified by staring at fans, and the child may display inordinate interest in
spinning objects. Music of all kinds may hold a special interest for the child. The
child may be extremely interested in buttons, parts of the body, playing with
water, or peculiar rote topics such as train schedules or historical dates. Tasks
involving long-term memory, for example, recall of the exact words of songs
heard years before, may be performed remarkably well.

    Associated features. Mood may be labile; crying may be unexplained or in-
consolable; there may be giggling or laughing without identifiable cause. There
is often underresponsiveness or overresponsiveness to sensory stimuli, such as
light, pain, or sound. Real dangers, such as moving vehicles and heights, may
not be appreciated. Peculiar nervous habits, such as hair pulling or biting parts
of the body, are sometimes present. Rocking or other rhythmic body movements
also occur.
    About 40% of children with the disorder have an IQ below 50; only 30%
have an IQ of 70 or more. These children show extreme variability in intellec-
tual functioning; they are often untestable on verbal tasks, and when testable,
performance is worst on tasks demanding symbolic or abstract thought and
sequential logic. However, tasks requiring manipulative or visual-spatial skills or
 immediate memory may be performed well.

    Age at onset. By definition, the age at onset is always before 30 months.
 However, it may be difficult to establish age at onset retrospectively unless those
 who cared for the child during the early years are able to give accurate informa-
 tion about language development, sociability, and play. Parents of only children
 may be unaware of the problems until the child is observed with other children.
 The parents may then date the age at onset from that point, although a careful
 history will usually reveal that the abnormalities were present earlier.

     Course. The disorder is chronic. Some of these children eventually are able
 to lead independent lives, with only minimal signs of the essential features of
 the disorder; but often the social awkwardness and ineptness persist (Residual
 State). Overall, one child in six makes an adequate social adjustment and is able
 to do some kind of regular work by adulthood; another one in six makes only
 a fair adjustment; and two-thirds remain severely handicapped and unable to
 lead independent lives. Factors related to long-term prognosis include IQ and
 development of language skills.

     Impairment. The disorder is extremely incapacitating, and special educa-
 tional facilities are almost always necessary.

     Complications. The major complication is the development of epileptic sei-


                       Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 89

 zures secondary to an underlying physical disorder; about 25% or more of cases
develop seizures in adolescence or early adult life. Most of the children with an
 IQ below 50 develop seizures, but only very few of those with normal intelli-
gence do so.

    Prevalence. The disorder is very rare (2-4 cases per 10,000). It is apparently
more common in the upper socioeconomic classes, but the reason for this is not
clear.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is about three times more common in boys than in
girls.

    Predisposing factors. Maternal rubella (especially when associated with in-
fantile deafness or blindness), phenylketonuria, encephalitis, meningitis, and
tuberous sclerosis are among the predisposing factors. In the past, certain familial
interpersonal factors were thought to predispose to the development of this syn-
drome, but recent studies do not support this view.

    Familial pattern. The prevalence of Infantile Autism is 50 times as great in
siblings of children with the disorder than in the general population.

    Differential diagnosis. In Mental Retardation there are often behavioral ab-
normalities similar to those seen in Infantile Autism. However, the full syndrome
of Infantile Autism is rarely present. When both disorders are present, both
diagnoses should be made. In Schizophrenia occurring in childhood there are
oddities of behavior; but typically there are hallucinations, delusions, and loosen-
ing of associations or incoherence, which are not present in Infantile Autism. In
Childhood Onset Pervasive Developmental Disorder, the age at onset is later than
in Infantile Autism and the full syndrome of Infantile Autism is not present. In
children with hearing impairments there will be a history of responding consis-
tently only to very loud sounds, whereas in Infantile Autism the response to
sounds is inconsistent. An audiogram can rule out the possibility of hearing im-
pairment. In Developmental Language Disorder, Receptive Type, the children
generally make eye contact and will often try to communicate appropriately by
means of gestures, whereas in Infantile Autism there is a pervasive lack of
responsiveness.

  Diagnostic criteria for Infantile Autism
  A. Onset before 30 months of age.

  B. Pervasive lack of responsiveness to other people (awiisiH).

  C. Gross deficits in language development

  D. If speech; is present, peculiar speech patterns such arimmediate and
  delayed echolatia, rnetaphorical langyage, pronominal reversal


 90 Diagnostic Categories

   E. Bizarre responses to various aspects of the environment, e.g., resistance
   to change, peculiar interest in or attachments to animate or inanimate
   objects.

   F. Absence of delusions, hallucinations, loosening of associations, and
   incoherence as in Schizophrenia.

 299.00 Infantile Autism, Full Syndrome Present
 Currently meets the criteria for Infantile Autism.

 299.01 Infantile Autism, Residual State

   Diagnostic criteria tor Infantile Autism, Residual State
   A. Once had an illness that met the criteria for Infantile Autism.

   B. The current clinical picture no longer meets the full criteria for
   Infantile Autism, but signs of the illness have persisted to the present, such
   as oddities of communication and social awkwardness.

 299.9x Childhood Onset Pervasive Developmental Disorder
The essential features are a profound disturbance in social relations and multi-
ple oddities of behavior, all developing after 30 months of age and before 12
years.
    The disturbance in social relationships is gross and sustained, with such
symptoms as lack of appropriate affective responsivity, inappropriate clinging,
asociality, and a lack of peer relationships.
    Oddities of behavior include: sudden excessive anxiety, constricted or inap-
propriate affect, resistance to change in the environment or insistence on doing
things in the same manner every time, oddities of motor movement, speech ab-
normalities, hyper- or hypo-sensitivity to sensory stimuli, and self-mutilation.
Examples of these behaviors are given in the diagnostic criteria.

    Associated features. Frequently there are bizarre ideas and fantasies and
preoccupation with morbid thoughts or interests. There may be pathological
preoccupation with and attachment to objects, such as always carrying a string or
rubber band. The disorder is particularly common in children with low IQs.

    Age at onset. By definition the age at onset is after 30 months and before
12 years of age.

    Course. The course is chronic. The long-term prognosis is probably better
than that of Infantile Autism.

    Impairment. The disorder is extremely incapacitating, and special educa-
tional facilities are regularly necessary.


                       Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 91

     Complications. The major complication is inability to function indepen-
 dently and the consequent continued need for supervision and financial support.

    Predisposing factors. No information.

    Prevalence. This is an extremely rare disorder.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is far more common in boys than in girls.

    Familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. In Schizotypal Personality Disorder there are also
oddities of behavior and communication, but any disturbance in social relations
is mild in comparison with the profound disturbance present in Childhood Onset
Pervasive Developmental Disorder. Furthermore, symptoms such as disturbances
in motor movement, inappropriate affect, and self-mutilation are not present in
Schizotypal Personality Disorder.
    For a discussion of the differential diagnosis with other conditions, see In-
fantile Autism, p. 89.

  Diagnostic criteria lor Childhood Onfet Pervasive Developmental Disorder
  A. Gross and sustained impairment in social relationships, e.g., lack of
  appropriate affective responsivity, inappropriate clinging, asocialfty, lack
  of empathy.

  B. At least three of the following:

      (1) sodden excessive anxiety manifested by such symptoms as free-
      floating anxiety, catastrophic reactions to everyday occurrences, in-
      ability to be consoled when upset, unexplained panic attacks
      (2) constricted or inappropriate affect, including lack of appropriate
      fear reactions, unexplained rage reactions, and extreme mood lability
      (3) resistance to change in the environment (e,g., upset if dinner time
      is changed), or insistence on doing things in the same manner every
      time (e.g., putting on clothes always in the same order)
      (4) oddities of motor movement, such as peculiar posturing, peculiar
      hand or finger movements, or walking on tiptoe
      (5) abnormalities of speech, such as questionlike melody, monoto-
      nous voice
      (6) hyper- or hypo-sensitivity to sensory stimuli, e.g., hyperacusis
      (7) self-mutilation, e.g., biting or hitting self, head banging

  C. Onset of the full syndrome after 30 months of age arid before 12
  years of age,

  D. Absence of delusions, hallucinations, incoherence, or marked loosen-
  ing of associations.


 92 Diagnostic Categories

 299.90 Childhood Onset Pervasive Developmental Disorder, Full Syndrome
        Present
 Currently meets the criteria for Childhood Onset Pervasive Developmental
 Disorder.

 299.91 Childhood Onset Pervasive Developmental Disorder, Residual State

   Diagnostic criteria for Childhood Onset Pervasive Developmental Dis-
   order, Residual State
   jfc Once had an illness that met the criteria for Childhood Onset Per-
   vasive Developmental Disorder.

   B. The current clinical picture no longer meets the full criteria for the
   disorder, byt signs of the illness have persisted to the present, such as
   oddities of communication and social awkwardness.

 299.8x Atypical Pervasive Developmental Disorder
 This category should be used for children with distortions in the development of
 multiple basic psychological functions that are involved in the development of
 social skills and language and that cannot be classified as either Infantile Autism
 or Childhood Onset Pervasive Developmental Disorder.

 SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS (AXIS II)
 This subclass is for disorders of specific areas of development not due to another
 disorder. For example, a delay in language development in an otherwise normal
child would be classified as a Specific Developmental Disorder whereas a delay
 in language development in a child with Infantile Autism would be attributed
 to the Infantile Autism and therefore would not be classified as a Specific Devel-
opmental Disorder. Similarly, an individual with general delays in development
would receive a diagnosis of Mental Retardation, not a Specific Developmental
Disorder.
    Each aspect of development noted here is related to biological maturation.
However, there is no assumption regarding the primacy of biological etiological
factors, and nonbiological factors are clearly involved in these disorders.
    The inclusion of these categories in a classification of "mental disorders" is
controversial, since many of the children with these disorders have no other
signs of psychopathology, and the detection and treatment of the most common
category, Developmental Reading Disorder, take place mainly within the educa-
tional system rather than the mental health system. Nevertheless, these condi-
tions fall within the DSM-III concept of mental disorder (see p. 6); moreover,
they are included in the mental disorders section of ICD-9 (see Appendix D).
    Because Specific Developmental Disorders occur so frequently in conjunc-
tion with other disorders, they are coded on a separate axis (Axis II) to ensure
that they are not overlooked. Thus, in the case of a child with Conduct Disorder
and Developmental Reading Disorder, the Conduct Disorder will be coded on


                      Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 93

Axis I, and the reading disorder on Axis II. A particular child may have more
than one Specific Developmental Disorder; all should be diagnosed.
    Although most of the clinical features seen in Specific Developmental Dis-
orders represent functional levels that are normal for very young children (e.g.,
inability to do arithmetic), there is no implication that children with these dis-
orders are simply at a lower end of a normal continuum and that they will
"catch up" with time. In fact, children with these disorders frequently continue
to show signs of the disturbance as adolescents or as adults; and the relevant
diagnosis should be noted when an adult still has clinically significant signs of
the disorder.
    Age at onset. In these disorders onset is related to the age at which each
area of functioning is expected to begin to develop. Thus, Developmental Lan-
guage and Articulation Disorders may be first recognized within the first three
years of life, when speech normally develops; and Developmental Reading and
Arithmetic Disorders are first recognized in the first few years of school, when
these skills normally develop.
    Course. In most cases the disturbance is stable throughout childhood and
adolescence, and many individuals continue to show some attenuated signs of
the disturbance in adult life. More rarely, especially in mild cases, there is
marked improvement in, or even disappearance of, all symptoms in time.
    Impairment. Invariably there is some degree of impairment in academic
functioning. The overall level of impairment is most marked when language or
articulation is affected.
    Complications. Academic failure, truancy, and antisocial behavior are among
the commonly observed complications.

    Predisposing factors. Factors that predispose one to most of these disorders
are generally unknown. However, being a twin, being born prematurely or of
an older mother, or sustaining a head injury apparently predispose to Develop-
mental Reading Disorder.

    Sex ratio. No information is available for Developmental Arithmetic Dis-
order. The other Specific Developmental Disorders are all about twice as com-
mon in males as in females.

315.00 Developmental Reading Disorder
The essential feature is significant impairment in the development of reading
skills not accounted for by chronological age, mental age, or inadequate school-
ing. In addition, in school, the child's performance on tasks requiring reading
skills is significantly below his or her intellectual capacity. "Significant" impair-
ment differs somewhat with age: a one-to-two-year discrepancy in reading skill
for ages 8 to 13 is significant, but below that age, it is difficult to specify how
great a discrepancy is significant.
    This disorder has been referred to as "dyslexia." Faulty oral reading occurs,
often characterized by omissions, additions, and distortions of words. Reading


94 Diagnostic Categories

is slow, and often there is reduced reading comprehension, although the ability
to copy from written or printed texts is generally unaffected.
    The diagnosis can be made only by individually administered IQ tests that
contain verbal subtests and that yield a level of full-scale IQ, plus a variety of
academic achievement tests that contain reading subtests.

    Associated features. In spelling to dictation there may be numerous and bi-
zarre errors that are not explainable by phonetics or by simple reversal of letters
(such as b—d). Other common associated features include subtle language diffi-
culties, such as impaired sound discrimination and difficulties with sequencing
words properly, and behavioral problems, such as those associated with Atten-
tion Deficit Disorder and Conduct Disorder. "Soft" neurological signs, such as
finger agnosia, may be found, particularly in younger children.
    Prevalence. The disorder is apparently common.
    Familial pattern. Reading difficulty and speech and language problems are
more common in family members than in the general population.

    Differential diagnosis. In Mental Retardation, reading difficulty is due to a
general impairment in intellectual functioning. However, in some cases of Mild
Mental Retardation, the reading level is significantly below the expected level,
given the individual's schooling and level of retardation. In such cases the addi-
tional diagnosis of Developmental Reading Disorder should be made, since treat-
ment of the reading difficulties can greatly increase occupational potential.
    Inadequate schooling can result in poor performance on standardized read-
ing tests. In such cases, however, other children in the school will generally have
similar difficulty. Impaired vision or hearing may affect reading ability, and can
be ruled out with screening tests.

  Diagnostic criteria for Developmental Reading Disorder
      Performance on standardized,.individually administered tests of read-
  ing skill is significantly below the expected level, given the individual's
  schooling, chronological age, and ^ mental age (as determined by an indi-
  vidually administered IQ test). In addittoivin school, the child's per-
  formance on tasks requiring reading skills is significantly below his or her
  intellectual capacity.

315.10 Developmental Arithmetic Disorder
The essential feature is significant impairment in the development of arithmetic
skills not accounted for by chronological age, mental age, or inadequate school-
ing. In addition, in school, the child's performance on tasks requiring arithmetic
skills is significantly below his or her intellectual capacity. The diagnosis can be
made only by individually administered IQ tests that yield a level of full-scale
IQ, plus a variety of academic achievement tests containing arithmetic subtests.

    Associated features. Other academic problems, including reading and spell-


                       Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 95

 ing difficulty, are often present; but generally the degree of these deficits is not
 as pronounced.

     Prevalence. The disorder is apparently not common.

     Familial pattern. No information.

     Differential diagnosis. See Developmental Reading Disorder (p. 94).

   Diagnostic criteria for Developmental Arithmetic Disorder
       Performance on standardized/ individually administered tests of
   arithmetic achievement is significantly below expected level, given the
   individual's schooling, chronological age, and mental age (as determined
   by an individually administered IQ test), tn addition, in school, the child's
   performance on tasks requiring arithmetic skills is significantly below his
   or her intellectual capacity.

 315.31 Developmental Language Disorder
 There are three major types of language disorder: (1) failure to acquire any lan-
 guage, (2) acquired language disability, (3) delayed language acquisition (Devel-
 opmental Language Disorder). Failure to acquire any language is rare and vir-
 tually always is a result of profound Mental Retardation. Acquired language
 disabilities are usually the result of trauma or neurological disorder. Develop-
 mental Language Disorder, the most common type of language disorder, involves
 difficulty in comprehending oral language (Receptive Type) or in expressing
 verbal language (Expressive Type). (Although these two subtypes are described
 separately, no digit is available for indicating them separately.)
     These conditions have each been referred to as Developmental Aphasia, but
 this is technically not correct, since aphasia means loss of language that has al-
 ready been acquired.

 Developmental language disorder: expressive type
 The essential feature is failure to develop vocal expression (encoding) of lan-
 guage while understanding or decoding skills remain relatively intact. Mothers
 will report that their children seem to understand language, but "can't get the
 words out." Articulation is generally immature, with the more difficult sounds
 e.g., th, r, s, z, y, 1, being omitted or other sounds substituted for them. The
 child's vocabulary is severely restricted; and even by four years of age, the child
 usually is unable to generate more than short phrases. Old words appear to be
 forgotten when new ones are learned. The child's use of various grammatical
 structures is considerably below age level.

    Associated features. There may be slight lags in achieving developmental
milestones. Learning may be impaired, particularly in tasks involving percep-
tual skills or skills in recognizing and reproducing symbols in the proper se-
quence.


 96 Diagnostic Categories

     Prevalence. Preliminary studies indicate that 1 in every 1,000 children may
 have this disorder.

     Familial pattern. Developmental Articulation Disorder and other Specific
 Developmental Disorders are more common in family members of individuals
 with Developmental Language Disorder, Expressive Type, than in the general
 population.

     Differential diagnosis. In Developmental Language Disorder, Receptive
 Type, comprehension of language is impaired, whereas in Developmental Lan-
 guage Disorder, Expressive Type, language comprehension is within normal
 limits. In Developmental Articulation Disorder, expressive language (vocabulary
 and grammar) is within normal limits, whereas in Developmental Language Dis-
 order, Expressive Type, expressive language is impaired.
     In Mental Retardation, there is general impairment in intellectual function-
 ing, whereas in Developmental Language Disorder, Expressive Type, nonverbal
 intelligence is within normal limits. With a hearing impairment, a child does not
 have a normal audiogram and does not respond normally to sounds, whereas in
 Developmental Language Disorder, Expressive Type, audiogram and response to
 sounds are normal. In Infantile Autism and in Childhood Onset Pervasive De-
 velopmental Disorder, there is no "inner language," imaginary play, use of ges-
 tures, or warm social relationships, whereas these are all present in children
 with Developmental Language Disorder, Expressive Type.
    In acquired aphasia, normal language is followed by onset of language dis-
 order that may be associated with head trauma, seizures, or EEC abnormalities,
whereas in Developmental Language Disorder, Expressive Type, normal language
has not developed.

  Diagnostic criteria for Developmental Language Disorder, Expressive
  Type
  A. Failure to develop vocal expression (encoding) of language despite
   relatively intact comprehension of language.

  B. Presence of inner language (the presence of age-appropriate con-
  cepts, such as understanding; the purpose and use of a particular household
  object).

  C. Not due to Mental Retardation, Childhood Onset Pervasive Develop-
  mental Disorder, hearing impairment, or trauma.

Developmental language disorder: receptive type
The essential feature is failure to develop comprehension (decoding) and vocal
expression (encoding) of language. Deficits occur in sensory perception (recogni-
tion of auditory symbols [sounds] or visual symbols [pictures]), integration
(ability to relate or manipulate auditory or visual symbols [e.g., recognizing that


                         Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 97

a shoe and a sock are somehow related]), storage recall (ability to reproduce a
sequence of auditory or visual stimuli some time after it has been presented),
and "sequencing" (ability to recognize or reproduce sequences of symbols).

    Associated features. A partial hearing defect for pure tones, resistance to
auditory arousal, and inability to localize sound sources are common in this dis-
order. There often is a mild delay in the development of motor skills. Reading
and spelling difficulties are invariably present. EEC abnormalities, usually bilat-
eral, have been reported in some cases.

    Prevalence. The rate of occurrence may be as high as 1 in 2,000.

    Familial pattern. Seizures and all Specific Developmental Disorders, espe-
cially Developmental Reading Disorder, are apparently more common among
family members of individuals with Developmental Language Disorder, Recep-
tive Type than in the general population.

    Differential diagnosis. In Developmental Language Disorder, Expressive
Type, the child's comprehension of language is within normal limits for age
level, whereas in Developmental Language Disorder, Receptive Type, language
comprehension is below age level. In Developmental Articulation Disorder, both
expression and comprehension of language are within normal limits for the
child's age level, whereas in Developmental Language Disorder, Receptive Type,
these are both impaired. In Mental Retardation there is general impairment in
intellectual functioning, whereas in Developmental Language Disorder, Recep-
tive Type, the child has at least normal nonverbal IQ. In hearing impairment,
the child will have a history of responding only to very loud sounds, whereas
in Developmental Language Disorder, Receptive Type, there may be a history of
variable and inconsistent responses to sounds, the child often responding more
to environmental sounds than to speech sounds. Abnormal audiometric test re-
sults occur in both hearing impairment and in Developmental Language Disor-
der, Receptive Type. In Infantile Autism and in Childhood Onset Pervasive De-
velopmental Disorder, no efforts are made to communicate or watch faces,
whereas in Developmental Language Disorder, Receptive Type, the children will
make eye contact and will often try to communicate through gestures. In Infan-
tile Autism, Childhood Onset Pervasive Developmental Disorder, and Develop-
mental Language Disorder, Receptive Type, there are short auditory memory
spans, auditory discrimination problems, and abnormalities of pitch and intona-
tion.
    In acquired aphasia, normal language is followed by a sudden onset of lan-
guage problems, whereas in Developmental Language Disorder, Receptive Type,
there is failure to develop language.

  Diagnostic criteria for Developmental Language Disorder, Receptive Type
  Ai Fittee to develop comprehension (decoding) and vocal expression
  (encoding) of language.


 98 Diagnostic Categories

   B. Not due to hearing impairment trauma, Mental Retardation, or Child-
   hood Onset Pervasive Developmental Disorder,

 315.39 Developmental Articulation Disorder
 The essential feature is failure to develop consistent articulations of the later-
 acquired speech sounds, such as r, sh, th, f, z, I, or ch. Omissions occur or substi-
 tutions are made for these sounds, giving the impression of "baby talk." Vocabu-
 lary and grammatical structures are within age norms. This disorder encom-
 passes a range from the misarticulation of one sound (e.g., 1 or n as in "lalling")
 to mispronouncing several sounds (e.g., s, z, sh, ch as in "lisping").

     Associated features. Mild reading difficulties may be present.

     Prevalence and sex ratio. The disorder is present in about 6% of male and
 3% of female school-aged children.

     Familial pattern. The disorder is more common among family members than
 in the general population.

     Differential diagnosis. In Developmental Language Disorder, Mental Retar-
 dation, Infantile Autism, and Childhood Onset Pervasive Developmental Disor-
 der, language development is impaired, whereas in Developmental Articulation
 Disorder, language development is normal. In hearing impairment, audiometric
 testing will reveal an abnormality, whereas in Developmental Articulation Dis-
 order, hearing will be normal. In dysarthria (abnormal articulation due to dis-
 orders of the oral speech mechanism or to neurological abnormalities), there may
 be problems with chewing or sucking, drooling, the rate of speech may be slowed
 down, and vowel sounds may be affected. None of these are present in Develop-
 mental Articulation Disorder.

   Diagnostic criteria for Developmental Articulation Disorder
  A, Failure to develop consistent articulations of the later-acquired speech
   sounds, such as r, sh, th, f, z, \f or ch,

  B. Not due to Developmental Language Disorder, Mental Retardation,
  Childhood Onset Pervasive Developmental Disorder, or physical disorders.

315.50 Mixed Specific Developmental Disorder
This category should be used when there is more than one Specific Developmen-
tal Disorder, but none is predominant. It is common for a delay in the develop-
ment of one skill (e.g., reading, arithmetic, or language) to be associated with
delays in other skills. The Mixed Specific Developmental Disorder category
should be used when the mixture of delayed skills is such that all skills are im-
paired to relatively the same degree. When the skills are impaired to varying


                      Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Disorders 99

degrees, multiple diagnoses should be recorded, the skill most seriously impaired
being recorded first.

315.90 Atypical Specific Developmental Disorder
This is a residual category for use when there is a Specific Developmental Dis-
order not covered by any of the previous specific categories.


This page intentionally left blank 


               Organic Mental Disorders


 In DSM-III a distinction is made between organic brain syndromes and organic
 mental disorders. "Organic brain syndrome" is used to refer to a constellation
 of psychological or behavioral signs and symptoms without reference to etiology
 (e.g., Delirium, Dementia); "organic mental disorder" designates a particular
 organic brain syndrome in which the etiology is known or presumed (e.g., Alco-
 hol Withdrawal Delirium, Multi-infarct Dementia).
     By tradition, disorders that are related either to aging of the brain or to the
 ingestion of a substance are classified as mental disorders. For this reason Pri-
 mary Degenerative Dementia, Multi-infarct Dementia, and the various Sub-
 stance-induced Organic Mental Disorders are included in Section 1 of this chap-
 ter, beginning on page 124. Organic Mental Disorders whose etiology or patho-
 physiological process is either a diagnosis not included in the mental disorders
 section of ICD-9-CM or is unknown are in Section 2, page 162.
    The essential feature of all these disorders is a psychological or behavioral
 abnormality associated with transient or permanent dysfunction of the brain.
 Organic Mental Disorders are diagnosed (a) by recognizing the presence of one
 of the Organic Brain Syndromes, as described below, and (b) by demonstrating,
by means of the history, physical examination, or laboratory tests, the presence
 of a specific organic factor judged to be etiologically related to the abnormal
 mental state. Under certain circumstances, however, a reasonable inference of an
 organic factor can be made from the clinical features alone, in which case only
 step (a) may be necessary for diagnosis.
    Organic Mental Disorders are a heterogeneous group; therefore, no single
description can characterize them all. The differences in clinical presentation re-
flect differences in the localization, mode of onset, progression, duration, and
nature of the underlying pathophysiological process.
    Differentiation of Organic Mental Disorders as a separate class does not
imply that nonorganic ("functional") mental disorders are somehow independent
of brain processes. On the contrary, it is assumed that all psychological pro-
cesses, normal and abnormal, depend on brain function. Limitations in our knowl-
edge, however, sometimes make it impossible to determine whether a given
mental disorder in a given individual should be considered an organic mental
disorder (because it is due to brain dysfunction of known organic etiology) or
whether it should be diagnosed as other than an Organic Mental Disorder (be-
cause it is more adequately accounted for as a response to psychological or social

   * This chapter begins with a general description of Organic Mental Disorders as a broad cate-
gory. It then describes ten specific Organic Brain Syndromes. Finally, each of the various Organic
Mental Disorders is described.

                                101


102 Diagnostic Categories

factors [as in Adjustment Disorder] or because the presence of a specific organic
factor has not been established [as in Schizophrenia]).
    The organic factor responsible for an Organic Mental Disorder may be a
primary disease of the brain or a systemic illness that secondarily affects the
brain. It may also be a substance or toxic agent that is either currently distur-
bing brain function or has left some long-lasting effect. Withdrawal of a sub-
stance on which an individual has become physiologically dependent is another
cause of Organic Mental Disorder.
    The most common Organic Brain Syndromes are Delirium, Dementia, In-
toxication, and Withdrawal. These syndromes display great variability among
individuals and in the same individual over time. More than one Organic Brain
Syndrome may be present in an individual simultaneously (e.g., Delirium super-
imposed upon Dementia), and one Organic Brain Syndrome may succeed an-
other (e.g., thiamine-deficiency Delirium [Wernicke's encephalopathy] followed
by Alcohol Amnestic Disorder [Korsakoff's disease]).

    Associated features. A wide variety of different emotional, motivational,
and behavioral abnormalities are associated with Organic Mental Disorders. It
is often impossible to decide whether the symptoms are the direct result of dam-
age to the brain or are a reaction to the cognitive deficits and other psychologi-
cal changes that constitute the essential features of these disorders.
    Severe emotional disturbances may accompany cognitive impairment in a
person who views it as a loss, a serious threat to self-esteem, or both. Anxiety,
depression, irritability, and shame of varying degrees of intensity may be pres-
ent.
    Compulsive individuals tend to be particularly intolerant of and disturbed
by their reduced cognitive capacity or by perceptual abnormalities, such as
hallucinations. They tend to react with a fear of loss of control. There may also
be severe depression leading to suicidal attempts. Other individuals cope with
memory and other cognitive deficits by marked orderliness, which helps them
maintain some degree of control. Such people insist on keeping things in exactly
the same places, keeping detailed notes and diaries to counteract forgetfulness,
and avoiding situations in which their deficits could be exposed. Some people
resort to circumstantiality and confabulation in an effort to conceal gaps in
memory.
    Paranoid attitudes and actual delusions may be exhibited by habitually sus-
picious individuals who feel threatened by their cognitive impairment. They may
accuse others of maliciously misplacing or stealing their possessions. Irritability
and outbursts of temper, sometimes with physical aggression, may occur. Some
individuals are euphoric; others, apathetic.
    Decreased control over sexual, aggressive, and acquisitive impulses may ac-
company cognitive impairment. Social judgment may be impaired and result in
inappropriate behavior that provokes retaliation. Inappropriate sexual advances,
exhibitionistic acts, stealing, ravenous eating, and other manifestations of faulty
impulse control may be exhibited.
    These associated features reflect the individual's personality, educational
level, and interpersonal relations as well as the type and severity of the cogni-


                                       Organic Mental Disorders 103

tive impairment or abnormality. They are not necessarily correlated with the
degree of cognitive impairment: a person with a relatively mild cognitive impair-
ment may display conspicuous emotional and behavioral disturbance. Severe and
widespread brain dysfunction, such as follows extensive neuronal destruction or
metabolic dysfunction, may produce apathy, lethargy, incontinence of urine or
feces, diminished psychomotor activity, somnolence, or blunting of affect.
    Emotional and behavioral disturbances may result in social isolation, by
withdrawal or ostracism; and this, in turn, tends to aggravate the cognitive dis-
ability.

    Age at onset. Organic Mental Disorders may occur at any age. Delirium is
most apt to occur at the extremes of the life cycle, while Dementia is most com-
mon in the elderly.

    Course. Since Organic Mental Disorders encompass such a wide range of
psychopathological syndromes and organic etiologies, no single course charac-
terizes them all. Onset may be sudden, as in the case of Delirium associated with
an acute infection or Dementia resulting from major head trauma, or it may be
insidious, as in Primary Degenerative Dementia or the personality disturbance
sometimes associated with temporal lobe epilepsy.
    The course is also extremely variable. It may be steadily or irregularly pro-
gressive, episodic, static, or rapidly or gradually resolving. A major factor in
determining the course is the nature of the underlying pathology. Metabolic dis-
orders, substance intoxications and withdrawals, and systemic illnesses tend to
cause temporary brain dysfunction, and may be followed by full recovery. Patho-
logical processes causing structural damage to the brain are more likely to cause
permanent residual impairment.

                   ORGANIC BRAIN SYNDROMES

    The Organic Brain Syndromes can be grouped into six categories:
    1. Delirium and Dementia, in which cognitive impairment is relatively
global;
    2. Amnestic Syndrome and Organic Hallucinosis,* in which relatively selec-
tive areas of cognition are impaired;
    3. Organic Delusional Syndrome* and Organic Affective Syndrome,* which
have features resembling Schizophrenic or Affective Disorders;
    4. Organic Personality Syndrome,* in which the personality is affected;
    5. Intoxication and Withdrawal, in which the disorder is associated with
ingestion or reduction in use of a substance and does not meet the criteria for

   * When the etiological agent is a substance, the term "Organic" is dropped and the name of the
substance is substituted. For example, Organic Hallucinosis due to alcohol is called Alcohol Hallu-
cinosis.


104 Diagnostic Categories

any of the previous syndromes (Strictly speaking, these two Organic Brain
Syndromes are etiologically rather than descriptively defined.);
    6. Atypical or Mixed Organic Brain Syndrome, which constitutes a residual
category for any other Organic Brain Syndrome not classifiable as one of the
previous syndromes.
    (This manual does not divide the Organic Brain Syndromes into psychotic
and nonpsychotic or acute and chronic [irreversible] forms, as have other classi-
fications. Whereas these distinctions were made on the basis of severity, mode
of onset, and presumptions concerning prognosis, the present classification is
based on clinical symptoms alone. Delirium may, however, be said to be roughly
equivalent to the DSM-I concept of acute brain syndrome, and Dementia, to
that of chronic brain syndrome.)

Delirium
The essential feature is a clouded state of consciousness, that is, a reduction in
the clarity of awareness of the environment. This is manifested by difficulty in
sustaining attention to both external and internal stimuli, sensory misperception,
and a disordered stream of thought. In addition, disturbances of sleep-wakeful-
ness and psychomotor activity are present. The onset is relatively rapid, and the
course typically fluctuates. The total duration is usually brief.
    In DSM-I this syndrome was called "acute brain syndrome." It has also
been termed "acute exogenous reaction type," "acute confusional state," "toxic
psychosis," and "metabolic encephalopathy." Furthermore, some reserve the term
"delirium" for a particular, agitated variety of confusional state with vivid visual
hallucinations. In this manual, however, Delirium is intended to include the
broad spectrum of clinical states having in common the essential features de-
scribed above.
    In Delirium there is difficulty shifting, focusing, and sustaining attention.
The individual is easily distracted by irrelevant stimuli. It may be difficult, or
impossible, to engage him or her in conversation because attention wanders.
    Perceptual disturbances are common and result in various misinterpreta-
tions, illusions, and hallucinations. For example, the banging of a door may be
mistaken for a pistol shot (misinterpretation); the folds of the bedclothes may
appear to be animate objects (illusion); or the individual may "see" a group of
people hovering over the bed when no one is actually there (hallucination). Al-
though sensory misperceptions and hallucinations are most commonly visual,
they may occur in other sensory modalities as well. Misperceptions range from
simple and uniform to highly complex. There are often both a delusional con-
viction of the reality of hallucinations and an emotional and behavioral response
in keeping with their content.
    The individual with Delirium cannot maintain a coherent stream of thought.
Thinking loses its usual clarity and direction toward a goal; it appears frag-
mented and disjointed. In mild Delirium, this may be manifested by accelera-
tion or slowing of thought; in severe Delirium, thinking may be totally disorga-
nized. This disturbance is reflected in speech that, in some cases, is limited and
sparse, and in others, pressured and incoherent, with unpredictable switching


                                       Organic Mental Disorders 105

from subject to subject. It is also reflected in defective reasoning and impaired
goal-directed behavior. Perseveration of speech and behavior may appear. Al-
though other cognitive disturbances, particularly disorientation and memory im-
pairment, are also present in Delirium, the person may be so inattentive and in-
coherent that these mental functions cannot be meaningfully assessed.
    The sleep-wakefulness cycle is almost invariably disturbed. This frequently
involves some depression in the level of consciousness, ranging from simple
drowsiness, through increasing stages of torpor, to stupor or semicoma. On the
other hand, some individuals with Delirium are hypervigilant and have difficulty
in falling asleep. Fluctuations from hypersomnolence to insomnia and reversals
of the customary sleep-waking cycle may also be present. Vivid dreams and
nightmares are common, and may merge with hallucinations.
    Psychomotor activity is also disturbed. Many individuals are restless and
hyperactive. Groping or picking at the bedclothes, attempting to get out of bed,
striking out at nonexistent objects, and sudden changes of position are manifes-
tations of increased psychomotor activity. On the other hand, there may be de-
creased psychomotor activity, with sluggishness and even certain features resem-
bling catatonic stupor. Psychomotor activity often shifts abruptly from one of
these extremes to another.

    Associated features. Emotional disturbances are very common and quite
variable. They include anxiety, fear, depression, irritability, anger, euphoria, and
apathy. Some individuals maintain the same emotional tone throughout the
course of the Delirium whereas others experience rapid and unpredictable
changes from one emotional state to another. Fear is very commonly experi-
enced, sometimes as the result of threatening hallucinations or poorly system-
atized delusions. If fear is marked, the individual may attempt to flee his or her
surroundings without regard to possible injury, or may attack those who are
falsely viewed as threatening. Severely depressed feelings may also lead to self-
destructive acts. Crying, calls for help, cursing, muttering, moaning, and other
vocal productions, particularly prominent at night, are further manifestations of
the disturbed emotional state of individuals with Delirium.
    Neurological signs are comparatively uncommon in Delirium. An important
exception, however, is the presence of abnormal movements. Various forms of
tremor are frequently present. Asterixis, a peculiar flapping movement of the
hyperextended hands, was originally described in hepatic encephalopathy, but
may be found in other delirious states as well. Autonomic signs (tachycardia,
sweating, flushed face, dilated pupils, and elevated blood pressure) commonly
occur.
    Other disorders of higher cortical function in Delirium include dysnomia
(inability to name objects) and dysgraphia (impaired ability to write).

    Age at onset. Delirium can occur at any age, but is especially common in
children and after the age of 60.

    Course. Delirium usually develops over a short period of time. Sometimes
it begins quite abruptly, e.g., after a head injury or following a seizure. At other


106 Diagnostic Categories

times it is preceded, for hours or days, by certain prodromal symptoms. These
include restlessness, difficulty in thinking clearly, hypersensitivity to auditory
and visual stimuli, nocturnal insomnia, daytime hypersomnolence, vivid dreams,
and nightmares. The slower evolution is more likely if systemic illness or meta-
bolic imbalance underlies the Delirium.
    Fluctuation in symptoms is one of the hallmarks of Delirium. Typically, the
individual is worse during sleepless nights or in the dark. So-called "lucid inter-
vals/' periods during which he or she is more attentive and coherent, may occur
at any time, but are most common in the morning. These fluctuations help dis-
tinguish Delirium from other brain syndromes.
    The duration of an episode of Delirium is usually brief, about one week;
it is rare for Delirium to persist for more than a month. If the underlying dis-
order is promptly corrected or is self-limited, recovery from Delirium may be
complete. On the other hand, if the underlying disorder persists, the clinical syn-
drome of Delirium gradually shifts to some other, more stable, organic brain
syndrome, or may cause death.

    Complications. Injuries may be sustained from falling out of bed or attempt-
ing to flee frightening hallucinations. Agitation may interfere with proper medi-
cal management. If inadequately or belatedly treated, Delirium may lead to a
Dementia or, more rarely, an Amnestic Syndrome or Organic Personality Syn-
drome.

    Etiological factors. The causes of Delirium usually lie outside the nervous
system and include: systemic infections; metabolic disorders such as hypoxia,
hypercarbia, hypoglycemia, ionic imbalances, hepatic or renal disease, or thiamine
deficiency; postoperative states; and substance intoxication and withdrawal.
Delirium also occurs in hypertensive encephalopathy, following seizures, and on
regaining consciousness after head trauma. Certain focal lesions of the right
parietal lobe and inferomedial surface of the occipital lobe may present as
Delirium.

    Predisposing factors. The immature or senescent brain is more susceptible
to the development of Delirium. Preexisting brain damage or a previous history
of Delirium appears to increase the chances of an individual's developing this
syndrome.

    Differential diagnosis. Schizophrenia, Schizophreniform Disorder, and other
psychotic disorders may also be marked by hallucinations, delusions, and dis-
ordered thinking and speech. In Delirium, however, these symptoms are ex-
tremely random and haphazard, without evidence of systematization. The course
fluctuates, and there is evidence of a clouded state of consciousness with global
cognitive impairment. Finally, in Delirium there is often a generalized slowing
of background activity in the electroencephalogram, and the syndrome's cause
is obviously organic.
     Whereas Dementia involves a global cognitive deficit occurring in a normal
state of consciousness, Delirium is basically a clouded state of consciousness.


                                        Organic Mental Disorders 107

 Often, however, the two syndromes coexist in the same individual, and it may
 be difficult to decide how much of the clinical picture to ascribe to one syndrome
 and how much to the other. One cannot diagnose Dementia in the presence of
 significant Delirium, because the symptoms of Delirium interfere with the proper
 assessment of Dementia. Only a definite history of pre-existing Dementia allows
 one to decide that an individual with Delirium also has Dementia. When there
 is uncertainty as to whether the symptoms in a given individual are basically
 those of Delirium or Dementia, it is best to make a provisional diagnosis of
 Delirium. This should lead to a more active therapeutic approach, and with time
 the proper diagnosis will become apparent.
     Factitious Disorder with Psychological Symptoms simulating an Organic
 Brain Syndrome might, under rare circumstances, present a problem in the dif-
 ferential diagnosis of Delirium. The individual with Factitious Disorder shows
 inconsistencies in tests of mental status. A normal electroencephalogram also
 helps to exclude Delirium.

   Diagnostic criteria for Delirium
   A. Clouding of consciousness (reduced clarity of awareness of the en-
   vironment), with reduced capacity to shift, focus, and sustain attention
   to environmental stimuli.

   B. At least two of the following:

       (1) perceptual disturbance; misinterpretations, illusions, or hallucina-
       tions
       {2) speech that is at times incoherent
       (3) disturbance of sleep^wakefufness cycle, with insomnia or day-
       time drowsiness
       (4) increased or decreased psychomotor activity

   C. Disodentation and memory impairment (if testable),

   D. Clinical features that develop over a short period of time (usually
   hours to days) and tend to fluctuate over the course of a day,

   E. Evidence, from the history, physical examination, or laboratory tests,
  of a specific organic factor judged to be etiologically related to the dis-
  turbance.

Dementia
The essential feature is a loss of intellectual abilities of sufficient severity to in-
terfere with social or occupational functioning. The deficit is multifaceted and
involves memory, judgment, abstract thought, and a variety of other higher
cortical functions. Changes in personality and behavior also occur. The diagnosis
is not made if these features are due to clouding of consciousness, as in Delirium.
However, Delirium and Dementia may coexist.


108 Diagnostic Categories

    As with all Organic Brain Syndromes, an underlying causative organic fac-
tor is always assumed. In certain clinical states, e.g., Primary Degenerative De-
mentia, however, it may be impossible to show a specific organic factor as the
definitive cause of the disturbance. These conditions may nevertheless be diag-
nosed as Dementia if (a) the impairment is a multifaceted loss of intellectual
ability, (b) there is no evidence for a diagnosis other than an Organic Mental
Disorder, and (c) a diligent search has failed to reveal a specific organic etiologic
factor.
    In the past, the term Dementia often implied a progressive or irreversible
course. The definition of Dementia in this manual, however, is based on clinical
symptoms alone, and carries no connotation as to prognosis. Dementia may be
progressive, static, or remitting. The reversibility of a Dementia is a function of
the underlying pathology and of the availability and timely application of effec-
tive treatment.
    Memory impairment is usually the most prominent symptom. In mild De-
mentia there is forgetfulness in daily life and a need to have statements repeated
several times to facilitate remembering. On examination there may only be a cer-
tain hesitancy in response to questions. In more severe memory impairment, the
individual may forget names, telephone numbers, directions, conversations, and
events of the day. He or she may leave tasks unfinished because of forgetting to
return after an interruption. This may cause a person to leave the water run-
ning in the sink or to neglect turning off the stove. In advanced forms of
Dementia, memory impairment is often so severe that the person forgets the
names of close relatives, his or her own occupation, schooling, birthday, or,
occasionally, even his or her own name. Memory disturbance may be for-
mally documented by demonstrating difficulty in learning new information
(short-term memory deficit) and in recalling material that was known in the past
(long-term memory deficit). The former is tested by asking the individual to
memorize the names of several unrelated objects, or a brief sentence, and then
to repeat them after a few minutes of distraction; the latter is tested by asking
about events that happened in the past.
    Impairment of abstract thinking takes many forms. The individual has trou-
ble coping with novel tasks, especially if pressed for time. He or she may try to
avoid situations and tasks that require the processing of new and complex infor-
mation. This deficit is sometimes formally assessed by asking the individual to
interpret proverbs or to perform such tasks as finding similarities or differences
between related words. The individual with Dementia interprets proverbs con-
cretely and has difficulty in finding similarities or differences.
    Impaired judgment and impulse control are also commonly observed. Coarse
language, inappropriate jokes, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, and
a general disregard for the conventional rules of social conduct are evidence of
bad judgment and poor impulse control. A previously cautious businesswoman
may embark on a reckless business venture. An elderly spinster may make sex-
ual advances to strangers. A retiree may shoplift without considering the con-
sequences. Marked impairment of judgment and impulse control is particularly
characteristic of certain Dementias that affect primarily the frontal lobes.
    Dementia also involves a variety of disturbances of higher cortical function.


                                       Organic Mental Disorders 109

Although language is unaffected by some neurological disorders that cause De-
mentia, in others it is abnormal. It may appear vague, stereotyped, and impre-
cise, with long circumlocutory phrases; or there may be specific signs of
aphasia, such as difficulty naming objects. In severe forms of Dementia, the in-
dividual may be virtually mute. So-called "constructional ability" is nearly al-
ways disturbed, and can be demonstrated by having the individual copy three-
dimensional figures, assemble blocks, or arrange sticks in specific designs. Ag-
nosias (failure to recognize or identify objects despite intact sensory function)
and apraxias (inability to carry out motor activities despite intact comprehension
and motor function) may also be present.
    Personality change is almost invariably present in Dementia, and may in-
volve either an alteration or an accentuation of premorbid traits. A common pat-
tern is for a normally active individual to become increasingly apathetic and
withdrawn. The range of social involvement narrows. The personality loses its
sparkle, and the individual is described by others as "not himself (or herself)."
Another pattern of change is for a previously neat and meticulous person to be-
come slovenly and unconcerned about appearances. On the other hand, some
individuals display an accentuation of preexisting compulsive, histrionic, impul-
sive, or paranoid traits. Irritability and cantankerousness are also common fea-
tures of Dementia.

    Associated features. When Dementia is mild and the individual has some
grasp of his or her deteriorating faculties, he or she may react with marked
anxiety or depression. Attempts to conceal or compensate for subjectively per-
ceived intellectual deficits are very common. This may result in excessive orderli-
ness, social withdrawal, or a tendency to relate events in excessive detail so as to
avoid exposure of gaps in memory. Paranoid ideation may occasionally be quite
marked and result in false accusations and verbal or physical attacks. The habitu-
ally jealous individual who develops a Dementia may develop the delusion of
marital infidelity and actually assault his or her spouse.
    Individuals with Dementia are especially vulnerable to physical and psycho-
social stressors. For example, bereavement or retirement may considerably aggra-
vate intellectual deficits.

    Age at onset. Dementia is found predominantly in the elderly, although
certain specific etiologic factors (see below) may cause Dementia at any age. The
diagnosis of Dementia may be made at any time after the intellectual quotient is
fairly stable (usually by age 3 or 4). Thus, if a child at age 4 developed a chronic
neurological disorder that interfered with previously acquired functions so as to
significantly lower intellectual and adaptive functioning, he or she would be con-
sidered to have both Dementia and Mental Retardation. In such a case both
diagnoses should be made, Mental Retardation being listed first because of its
greater relevance to management.

    Course. The mode of onset and subsequent course of Dementia depend on
the underlying etiology. When Dementia is a result of some clearly defined epi-
sode of neurological disease, such as cerebral hypoxia or encephalitis, or of head


110 Diagnostic Categories

trauma, it may begin quite suddenly, but then remain relatively stationary for a
long period of time. Primary Degenerative Dementia, on the other hand, is
usually insidious in onset and slowly, but relentlessly, progresses to death over
a period of several years. Dementia resulting from brain tumors, subdural hema-
tomas, and metabolic factors may also have a gradual onset. When the under-
lying disorder can be treated, as in hypothyroidism, subdural hematoma, normal-
pressure hydrocephalus, and tertiary neurosyphilis, Dementia may be arrested
or even reversed. However, the more widespread the structural damage to the
brain, the less likely is clinical improvement.

    Impairment. By definition Dementia is diagnosed only when the loss of in-
tellectual function is sufficiently severe to interfere with social or occupational
functioning, although the degree of impairment may vary. In advanced Dementia
the individual becomes totally oblivious of his or her surroundings and requires
constant care.

    Complications. Individuals with Dementia may wander and become lost.
They may, occasionally, do harm to themselves or others. Delirium frequently is
a complication of Dementia. Individuals with severe Dementia are susceptible to
infectious diseases, which often prove fatal.

    Etiological factors. Primary Degenerative Dementia of the Alzheimer type is
the most common Dementia. Other causes include: central nervous system infec-
tions (including tertiary neurosyphilis, tuberculous and fungal meningitis, viral
encephalitis, and Jakob-Creutzfeldt disease); brain trauma (especially chronic
subdural hematoma); toxic-metabolic disturbances (such as pernicious anemia,
folic-acid deficiency, hypothyroidism, bromide intoxication); vascular disease
(Multi-infarct Dementia); normal-pressure hydrocephalus; neurological diseases
such as Huntington's chorea, multiple sclerosis, and Parkinson's disease; and
postanoxic or posthypoglycemic states.

    Differential diagnosis. The normal process of aging has been associated in a
number of studies with a variety of different changes in intellectual function.
The nature of these changes and whether they should be considered true decre-
ments of function, however, remain controversial. The diagnosis of Dementia is
warranted only if intellectual deterioration is of sufficient severity to interfere
with social or occupational functioning. Dementia is not synonymous with aging.
    In Delirium there is also impairment of intellectual abilities, but it occurs
in the context of clouding of consciousness; in Dementia the state of conscious-
ness is normal. The clinical course of these two syndromes also differs. In De-
lirium symptoms typically fluctuate, whereas in Dementia they are relatively
stable. An Organic Mental Disorder persisting in unchanged form for more than
a few months suggests Dementia rather than Delirium. (See also Delirium, Dif-
ferential diagnosis, p. 106.)
    Schizophrenia, especially when chronic, may be associated with some degree
of intellectual deterioration. The absence of identifiable brain pathology helps
rule out the additional diagnosis of Dementia.


                                        Organic Mental Disorders 111

     Individuals with a major depressive episode may complain of memory im-
 pairment, difficulty in thinking and concentrating, and an overall reduction in
 intellectual abilities. They may also perform poorly on mental-status examination
 and neuropsychological testing. These features may suggest the possible diagno-
 sis of Dementia, and this phenomenon is sometimes known as "pseudodemen-
 tia." Depression, however, is primarily a disturbance of mood. Any cognitive
 deficits observed may be viewed as secondary to the disturbed affect. If suffi-
 ciently motivated to perform, individuals with depression usually demonstrate
 intact cognitive function. Dementia, on the other hand, is basically a disorder of
 intellectual function. Abnormalities of mood are less frequent and, when present,
 less pervasive than in depression. The clinical history also helps to differentiate
between the two. In depressive pseudodementia, the onset can frequently be
 dated with some precision, and symptoms progress more rapidly than in true De-
 mentia. In addition, there may be a history of previous mental illness. On formal
 mental-status testing there may be considerable variability in performance as
opposed to the more consistently poor performance of individuals with Demen-
 tia. In the absence of evidence of a specific organic etiologic factor, if the fea-
 tures suggesting major depressive episode are at least as prominent as those sug-
 gesting Dementia, it is best to diagnose major depressive episode and to assume
 that the features suggesting Dementia are secondary to the depression. A thera-
 peutic trial with an antidepressant drug or electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) (if
 not contraindicated) may clarify the diagnosis in that if the disorder is actually a
 major depressive episode, cognitive impairment may resolve as the mood im-
 proves.
    Factitious Disorder with Psychological Symptoms may mimic Dementia, but
rarely.

   Diagnostic criteria for Dementia
  A. A loss of tntellectuaj abilities of sufficient severity to interfere with
  social or occupational functioning.

  B. Memory impairment

  C. At least one of the following:

      (1) impairment of abstract thinking, as manifested by concrete inter-
      pretation of proverbs, inability to find similarities and differences
      between related words, difficulty in defining words and concepts,
      and other similar tasks
      (2) impaired judgment
      (3) other disturbances of higher cortical function, such as aphasia
      (disorder of language due to brain dysfunction), apraxia (inability
      to carry out motor activities despite intact comprehension and motor
      function), agnosia (failure to recognize or identify objects despite in?-
      tact sensory function), "constructional difficulty" (e,g,, inability to


112 Diagnostic Categories

      copy three-dimensional figures, assemble blocks, or arrange sticks
      in specific designs)
      (4) personality change, i.e., alteration or accentuation of premorbid
      traits

  D. State of consciousness not clouded (i.e., does not meet the criteria for
  Delirium or Intoxication, although these may be superimposed).

  E. Either (1) or (2):
      (1) evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
      tests, of a specific organic factor that is judged to be etiologically
      related to the disturbance
      (2) in the absence of such evidence, an organic factor necessary for
      the development of the syndrome can be presumed if conditions
      other than Organic Mental Disorders have been reasonably excluded
      and if the behavioral change represents cognitive impairment in a
      variety of areas

Amnestic Syndrome
The essential feature is impairment in short- and long-term memory occurring in
a normal state of consciousness (i.e., not clouded). The disturbance is attributed
to a specific organic factor. Amnestic Syndrome is not diagnosed if memory im-
pairment exists in the context of clouded consciousness (Delirium) or in associa-
tion with a more general loss of intellectual abilities (Dementia).
    The individual with an Amnestic Syndrome has both an ongoing inability
to learn new material (short-term memory deficit; anterograde amnesia) and an
inability to recall material that was known in the past (long-term memory deficit;
retrograde amnesia). The former is conventionally assessed by requiring the in-
dividual to remember several unrelated words or a short paragraph after a brief
(usually 5-15-minute) interval of distraction. The latter is tested by asking ques-
tions about events of the past such as birthplace, family, schooling, vocation,
major historical events, the names of recent presidents, etc. The individual with
an Amnestic Syndrome has difficulty with both of these operations of memory.
Events of the very remote past, however, are often better recalled than more
recent events. For example, an individual may remember in vivid detail a hospi-
tal stay that took place a decade before examination, but may have no idea that
he or she is currently in the hospital. So-called "immediate memory" (e.g., digit
span), however, is not impaired in Amnestic Syndrome.

    Associated features. A significant degree of amnesia nearly always results in
disorientation. Confabulation, the recitation of imaginary events to fill in gaps
in memory, is often observed, and when present tends to disappear with time.
Most individuals with this syndrome lack insight into their memory deficit, and
may explicitly deny it, despite evidence to the contrary. Others acknowledge a
problem, but appear unconcerned. Apathy, lack of initiative, and emotional


                                       Organic Mental Disorders 113

blandness are common. Although the individual is superficially friendly and
agreeable, his or her affect is shallow.
    When Amnestic Syndrome is the result of Alcohol Dependence and vitamin
deficiency (see Alcohol Amnestic Disorder, p. 136), other neurological complica-
tions of alcohol ingestion and malnutrition, such as peripheral neuropathy, cere-
bellar ataxia, etc., may also be observed.

    Course. The mode of onset depends on the etiology. In most cases it is fairly
sudden. The subsequent course, also a function of the etiology, is usually one of
chronicity.

    Impairment. Impairment in social and occupational functioning is usually
moderate to severe.

    Complications. Any complications are the direct result of the individual's
memory impairment. For example, the individual's forgetting to extinguish a
lighted cigarette may cause a fire.

    Etiological factors. Amnestic Syndrome may result from any pathological
process that causes bilateral damage to certain diencephalic and medial temporal
structures (e.g., mammillary bodies, fornix, hippocampal complex). Examples in-
clude head trauma, surgical intervention, hypoxia, infarction in the territory of
the posterior cerebral arteries, and herpes simplex encephalitis. The most com-
mon form of Amnestic Syndrome is that associated with thiamine deficiency and
chronic use of alcohol.

    Prevalence. The syndrome is apparently uncommon.

    Differential diagnosis. Delirium and Dementia also involve memory impair-
ment. In Delirium, however, there is also a clouding of consciousness; and in
Dementia, there are other major intellectual deficits as well.
    In Factitious Disorder with Psychological Symptoms, memory testing often
yields inconsistent results. Furthermore, there is no organic etiologic factor.

  Diagnostic criteria for Amnestic Syndrome
  A. Both short-term memory impairment (inability to learn new informa-
  tion) and long-term memory impairment (inability to remember informa-
  tion that was known in the past) are the predominant clinical features,

  B. No clouding of consciousness, as in Delirium and Intoxication, or
  general loss of major intellectual abilities, as in Dementia.

  C. Evidence, from the history, physical examination, or laboratory tests,
  of a specific organic factor that is judged to be ettologically related to the
  disturbance.


114 Diagnostic Categories

Organic Delusional Syndrome
The essential feature is the presence of delusions that occur in a normal state of
consciousness and that are due to a specific organic factor. The diagnosis is not
made if delusions occur in a clouded state of consciousness, as in Delirium, if
there is a significant loss of intellectual abilities, as in Dementia, or prominent
hallucinations are present, as in Organic Hallucinosis.
    The nature of the delusions is variable and depends, to some extent, on the
etiology. Persecutory delusions are the most common type. Amphetamine use
may cause a highly organized paranoid delusional state indistinguishable from
the active phase of Schizophrenia. Some individuals with cerebral lesions develop
the delusion that a limb of their body is missing.
    Hallucinations may be present in an Organic Delusional Syndrome, but
they are not the predominant feature.

    Associated features. Mild cognitive impairment is often observed. As in
Schizophrenia, almost any symptom may occur as an associated feature. The in-
dividual may appear perplexed, disheveled, or eccentrically dressed. Speech may
be rambling or incoherent. Abnormalities of psychomotor activity may occur,
with either hyperactivity (pacing, rocking), or apathetic immobility. Ritualistic,
stereotyped behavior, sometimes associated with magical thinking, may also be
observed. A dysphoric mood is common.

    Impairment. Impairment in social and occupational functioning is usually
severe.

    Complications. The individual may harm himself or herself or others while
reacting to delusions.

    Etiological factors. These are diverse. A number of substances—e.g., am-
phetamines, cannabis, and hallucinogens-—may cause this syndrome. Some indi-
viduals with temporal lobe epilepsy have an interictal Organic Delusional Syn-
drome that is almost indistinguishable from Schizophrenia. A paranoid Organic
Delusional Syndrome has been described in some cases of Huntington's chorea.
Certain cerebral lesions, particularly of the nondominant hemisphere, result in
this syndrome.
    Certain substances can also cause a more or less permanent Organic Delu-
sional Syndrome, essentially identical with Schizophrenia, even after the sub-
stance is no longer present in the body, analogous to "flashback" hallucinations.

    Differential diagnosis. Nonorganic psychotic disorders such as Schizophrenia
or Paranoid Disorders must be distinguished from Organic Delusional Syn-
drome. Differentiation rests primarily on evidence, gathered from the history,
physical examination, or laboratory tests, of a specific organic factor judged to
be responsible for the development of the delusions. The appearance of delu-
sions de novo in an individual over the age of 30 years without a known history
of Schizophrenia or Paranoid Disorder should always alert the diagnostician to
the possibility of an Organic Delusional Syndrome. On the other hand, the fact


                                       Organic Mental Disorders 115

that an individual has a prior history of nonorganic psychosis does not mean
that one should neglect consideration of an Organic Delusional Syndrome, espe-
cially if there is concern about a possible organic factor (for example, the inges-
tion of an hallucinogen).
    In Organic Hallucinosis/ hallucinations are the predominant feature. Delu-
sions, if present, are related to the hallucinations. In Organic Affective Syn-
drome, symptoms resembling those of the Affective Disorders predominate.
Delusions and hallucinations, if present, have a content related to the mood dis-
turbance.

  Diagnostic criteria for Organic Delusional Syndrome
  A. Delusions are the predominant clinical feature.

  B. There is no clouding of consciousness, as in Delirium; there is no
  significant loss of intellectual abilities, as in Dementia; there are no
  prominent hallucinations, as in Organic Hallucinosis.

  C. There is evidence, from the history, physical examination, or labora-
  tory tests, of a specific organic factor that is judged to be etiologically re-
  lated to the disturbance.

Organic Hallucinosis
The essential feature is the presence of persistent or recurrent hallucinations that
occur in a normal state of consciousness and that are attributable to a specific or-
ganic factor. Therefore, the diagnosis is not made if hallucinations occur in a
clouded state of consciousness, as in Delirium, with significant loss of intellectual
abilities, as in Dementia, if there is a major disturbance of mood, as in Organic
Affective Syndrome, or if delusions predominate, as in Organic Delusional Syn-
drome.
    Hallucinations may occur in any modality, but certain organic factors tend
to produce hallucinations of a particular type. For example, hallucinogens most
commonly cause visual hallucinations, whereas alcohol tends to induce auditory
hallucinations. Individuals who are blind as a result of cataracts may develop
visual hallucinations; those who are deaf as a result of otosclerosis will have
auditory hallucinations. Hallucinations vary from very simple and unformed to
highly complex and organized.
    The individual may be aware that the hallucinations are not real, or may
have a firm delusional conviction of their reality. Delusions, however, are not
the major feature of this syndrome, and are restricted to the content of the
hallucinations or to the belief that the hallucinations are real. Further elabora-
tion of delusional material (for example, the development of systematized perse-
cutory delusions to account for the hallucinations, or delusions not related to the
hallucinations) suggests an Organic Delusional Syndrome.

    Associated features. These features vary according to the etiology, the en-


 116 Diagnostic Categories

 vironment, and individual differences in response. Hallucinosis in congenial sur-
 roundings may be a pleasant experience; in other circumstances, the hallucina-
tions may be fraught with anxiety, depression, or other dysphoric affects.

    Course. Course depends on the underlying etiology. Alcohol Hallucinosis
 may last for as brief a period as a few hours to as long as several years. Un-
 treated cataracts or otosclerosis may cause a chronic Hallucinosis. If the syn-
drome is the result of sensory deprivation, the duration may be quite brief.

    Impairment. The degree of impairment is primarily a function of the under-
lying etiology.

    Complications. Accidents may occur in attempting to flee from frightening
hallucinations.

    Etiological factors. Use of hallucinogens and prolonged use of alcohol are the
most common causes of this syndrome. Sensory deprivation, as in blindness or
deafness, is another cause. Seizure foci, especially in the temporal and occipital
lobes, may also cause the syndrome.

    Differential diagnosis. In Delirium, hallucinations, if present, occur with
clouding of consciousness. In Dementia, hallucinations, if present, are associated
with a general loss of intellectual abilities. In Organic Delusional Syndrome,
hallucinations, if present, are overshadowed by the prominent delusions.
    Schizophrenia and Affective Disorders may involve hallucinations, but no
specific organic factor can be demonstrated.
    Hypnogogic and hypnopompic hallucinations may occur in individuals with-
out a mental disorder, but they occur only on falling asleep or on awakening.


  Diagnostic criteria lor Organic Hallucinosis
  A* Persistent or recurrent hallucinations are the predominant clinical
  feature,

  B. No clouding of consciousness, as in Delirium; no significant loss of
  intellectual abilities, as in Dementia; no predominant disturbance of
  mood, as in Organic Affective Syndrome; no predominant delusions, as
  in Organic Delusional Syndrome,

  C Evidence, from the history, physical examination, or laboratory tests,
  of a specific organic factor that is judged to be etiologically related to the
  disturbance.


                                       Organic Mental Disorders 117

 Organic Affective Syndrome
 The essential feature is a disturbance in mood, resembling either a manic epi-
 sode or a major depressive episode, that is due to a specific organic factor. The
 diagnosis is not made if the disturbance in mood occurs in a clouded state of con-
sciousness, as in Delirium; if it is accompanied by a significant loss of intellectual
abilities, as in Dementia, or persistent or recurrent hallucinations, as in Organic
Hallucinosis; or if delusions predominate, as in Organic Delusional Syndrome.
    The clinical phenomenology of this syndrome is the same as that of a manic
or major depressive episode (p. 206 and p. 210). The severity of the disturbance
may range from mild to severe. If delusions or hallucinations are present, they
are similar to those described under Affective Disorders.

    Associated features. Mild cognitive impairment is often observed. Any of the
features associated with the Affective Disorders may also be present. If the mood
is depressed, these features may include fearfulness, anxiety, irritability, brood-
ing, excessive somatic concerns, phobias, panic attacks, suspiciousness, and a
tearful, sad appearance. Delusions of persecution or worthlessness can occur. If
the mood is manic, irritability and lability of mood may be present. Hallucina-
tions and delusions are more common in the manic form than in the depressed
form.

    Impairment. Minimal to severe impairment can result.

    Complications. See manic and major depressive episodes (p. 216).

    Etiological factors. This syndrome is usually caused by toxic or metabolic
factors. Certain substances, notably reserpine, methyldopa, and some of the
hallucinogens, are apt to cause a depressive syndrome. Endocrine disorders are
another important etiological factor, and may produce either depressive or manic
syndromes. Examples are hyper- and hypothyroidism and hyper- and hypo-
adrenocorticalism. Carcinoma of the pancreas is sometimes associated with the
depressive syndrome, possibly due to an endocrine disturbance. Viral illness may
also cause a depressive syndrome. Structural disease of the brain is a rare cause
of an Organic Affective Syndrome.

    Differential diagnosis. In Affective Disorders, no specific organic factor can
be demonstrated. When an affective episode follows the taking of a psychoactive
substance, such as reserpine, the causal relationship between the ingestion of the
substance and the affective disturbance may not be clear. A history of previous
Affective Disorder in the individual or in family members suggests that the sub-
stance merely triggered an Affective Disorder in an individual who was particu-
larly vulnerable to the organic factor. On the other hand, the absence of a his-
tory of previous Affective Disorder in the individual or family members suggests
an Organic Affective Syndrome.


 118 Diagnostic Categories

     In Organic Personality Syndrome, there may be a disturbance of mood, but
 it is not as prominent as the change in personality.

   Diagnostic criteria for Organic Affective Syndrome
   A, The predominant disturbance is a disturbance in mood, with at least
   two of the associated symptoms listed in criterion B for manic or major
   depressive episode (see p. 208 and p. 213),

   B, No clouding of consciousness, as in Delirium; no significant loss of
   intellectual abilities, as in Dementia; no predominant delusions or hal-
   lucinations, as in Organic Delusional Syndrome or Organic Hallucinosis.

   C, Evidence, from the history, physical examination, or laboratory tests,
   of a specific organic factor that is judged to be etiologicalty related to the
   disturbance.

 Organic Personality Syndrome
 The essential feature is a marked change in personality that is due to a specific
 organic factor but that is not due to any other Organic Brain Syndrome. Organic
 Personality Syndrome in a young child may occur before the development of an
 enduring style of relating to the environment (personality). In such cases, the
 syndrome is recognized by significant changes in the child's usual behavior pat-
 terns.
     The clinical syndrome in a given individual depends principally on the na-
 ture and localization of the pathological process. A common pattern is charac-
 terized by emotional lability and impairment in impulse control or social judg-
 ment. The individual may be belligerent or have temper outbursts and sudden
 bouts of crying with little or no provocation. Socially inappropriate actions, such
 as sexual indiscretions, may be engaged in with little concern for the conse-
 quences. Another pattern is characterized by marked apathy and indifference.
 The individual may have no interest in his or her usual hobbies and appear un-
 concerned with events occurring in the immediate environment. (Both of these
 patterns may be associated with damage to the frontal lobes, and for this reason
 are sometimes referred to as "frontal lobe syndromes.") Another recognized
pattern, seen in some individuals with temporal lobe epilepsy, is a marked
tendency to humorless verbosity in both writing and speech, religiosity, and,
occasionally, exaggerated aggressiveness.
    The major personality change may be the development of suspiciousness or
paranoid ideation.

    Associated features. Mild cognitive impairment and irritability may be pres-
ent.

    Course. The course depends on the etiology. It may be transient, if it is the
result of a medication or other substance use, or persistent, if it is secondary to


                                       Organic Mental Disorders 119

structural damage to the brain. Occasionally an Organic Personality Syndrome
is the first manifestation of a disease process that eventually causes a Dementia.
For example, in multiple sclerosis an Organic Personality Syndrome may precede
the eventual development of a Dementia.

    Impairment. The degree of impairment is variable. Despite relatively intact
cognitive function, poor judgment may lead to such difficulties that the person
may require constant supervision or even custodial care.

    Complications. Socially unacceptable behavior may lead to social ostracism
or legal difficulties. Impulsive or explosive behavior may be dangerous to the in-
dividual and to others.

    Etiological factors. Organic Personality Syndrome is usually due to struc-
tural damage to the brain. The most common causes are neoplasms (for example,
meningiomas pressing on the frontal lobes), head trauma (including the post-
concussion syndrome), and vascular disease. A characteristic Organic Person-
ality Syndrome has been described as an interictal phenomenon in some individ-
uals with temporal lobe epilepsy. Multiple sclerosis and Huntington's chorea are
sometimes associated with this syndrome. Rather uncommon causes are en-
docrine disorders (thyroid and adrenocortical disease) and the ingestion of cer-
tain substances.

    Differential diagnosis. In Dementia, personality change is but one facet of
an overall syndrome that also includes significant loss of intellectual abilities.
Occasionally, personality change may be the first sign of an organic brain syn-
drome that will eventually evolve into Dementia. In these instances the initial
diagnosis of Organic Personality Syndrome will have to be changed to Dementia
as intellectual deficits increase and become the predominant feature. In Organic
Affective Syndrome there may be a personality change, but a mood disturbance
is the predominant clinical feature.
    When Attention Deficit Disorder develops in a child or adolescent and is
due to a specific organic factor, such as a known neurological disease, the addi-
tional diagnosis of Organic Personality Syndrome should not be made if the dis-
turbance is limited to an impairment of impulse control and attention.
    In Schizophrenia, Paranoid Disorders, Affective Disorders, and Disorders of
Impulse Control Not Elsewhere Classified, marked personality changes may
occur. In these disorders, however, no specific organic factor is judged etiologi-
cally related to the personality change.

  Diagnostic criteria for Organic Personality Syndrome
  A, A marked change in behavior or personality involving at least one of
  the following;

      (1) emotional lability, e.g., explosive temper outbursts, sudden crying


 120 Diagnostic Categories

       (2) impairment in impulse control, e.g., poor social judgment, sexual
       indiscretions, shoplifting
       (3) marked apathy and indifference, e.g., no interest in usual hobbies
       (4) suspiciousness or paranoid ideation

   B. No clouding.of consciousness, as in Delirium; no significant loss of
   intellectual abilities, as in Dementia; no predominant disturbance of
   mood, as in Organic Affective Syndrome; no predominant delusions or
   hallucinations, as in Organic Delusional Syndrome or Organic Hallu-
   cinosis.

   C. Evidence, from the history, physical examination, or laboratory tests,
   of a specific organic factor that is judged to be etiologically related to
   the disturbance.

   D. This diagnosis is not given to a child or adolescent if the clinical pic-
   ture is limited to the features that characterize Attention Deficit Disorder
   (see p. 41).

 Intoxication
 The essential features are maladaptive behavior and a substance-specific syn-
 drome that are due to the recent use and presence in the body of a substance.
 Evidence for the recent use and presence in the body of the substance can be ob-
 tained by history, physical examination (e.g., smell of alcohol), or laboratory tests
 of urine or blood. The clinical picture does not correspond to any of the specific
 Organic Brain Syndromes, such as Delirium, Organic Delusional Syndrome,
 Organic Hallucinosis, or Organic Affective Syndrome. (Intoxication may, how-
 ever, be superimposed on any Organic Brain Syndrome, with the exception of
 Delirium.)
     As used here, the concept of Intoxication is a residual category for a clinical
 picture, caused by an exogenous substance, that does not correspond to any of
 the specific Organic Brain Syndromes. Thus, use of amphetamine that caused
 clouding of consciousness and tactile hallucinations would be diagnosed as Am-
 phetamine Delirium, and only the milder clinical picture, without the full symp-
 tomatic picture of Delirium, would be diagnosed as Amphetamine Intoxication.
 Similar states caused by endogenous substances (such as ketone bodies in dia-
 betic acidosis) should be coded in the category Atypical or Mixed Organic Brain
 Syndrome (see p. 162).
    Although the specific clinical picture is determined by the nature of the sub-
stance used, the most common changes involve disturbances of perception, wake-
fulness, attention, thinking, judgment, emotional control, and psychomotor be-
havior.
    As used here, Intoxication refers to a mental disorder and requires the pres-
ence of maladaptive behavior. It should be noted that when used in the physio-
logical sense, the term "intoxication" is broader in scope than this definition


                                       Organic Mental Disorders 121

implies. Therefore, recreational use of substances that causes physiological and
psychological changes but that does not result in maladaptive behavior is not
considered Intoxication. For example, social drinking frequently causes loquacity,
euphoria, and slurred speech; but this should not be considered Intoxication un-
less maladaptive behavior, such as fighting, impaired judgment, interference with
social functioning, poor job performance, or failure to meet responsibilities,
results.

    Associated features. The particular substance used, the individual's expecta-
tions, pre-intoxication personality and biological state, and the environmental
circumstances of the substance use determine the associated features. For exam-
ple, Cannabis Intoxication may be intensified in an individual expecting religious
revelations from the substance. Intoxication in public places may result in bellig-
erent behavior or accidents. Withdrawn individuals may use intoxication as a
method of achieving further social withdrawal (as in the "solitary drinker").
Individuals with depression may become suicidal or experience increased dys-
phoria when intoxicated.

    Course. The rapidity of onset and the duration of an Intoxication depend
on: the amount of the substance consumed, how rapidly it was consumed, the
individual's tolerance (innate or acquired), body size (in general, the larger the
person, the larger the quantity required to induce intoxication), and the half-life
of the particular substance. In the case of alcohol, other considerations are the
specific beverage consumed (distilled spirits produce higher blood levels than the
same amount of alcohol consumed in the same period in the form of beer or
wine) and whether the alcohol is combined with food.
    Intoxication usually lasts for a few hours, but may last several days. In rare
instances an individual may continue taking the substance so that he or she
remains intoxicated for even longer periods.

    Impairment. During the intoxicated state the individual has, by definition,
some impairment in social or occupational functioning. This impairment in abil-
ity to function may be only minimal—for example, in Cannabis Intoxication at
a time when the individual knows that he or she has no social or occupational
responsibilities. On the other hand, impairment may be marked, for example, in
Alcohol Intoxication, if the intoxication occurs when the individual has major
social or occupational responsibilities.

    Complications. Excessive ingestion of substances that have a depressant
effect on the nervous system may result in coma or death. Substances that act
as stimulants may cause seizures. During the intoxicated state the individual
may fall or become involved in an automobile accident.
    An individual who has repeated instances of Intoxication over a period of
one month also has, by definition, Substance Abuse or Dependence. For some of
the substances, an initial Intoxication may develop into a specific Organic Brain
Syndrome. For example, Amphetamine Intoxication may develop into Ampheta-
mine Delirium; or methyl alcohol Intoxication may lead to a Dementia.


 122 Diagnostic Categories

     Differential diagnosis. When the criteria for Delirium, Organic Hallucinosis,
 Organic Delusional Syndrome or Organic Affective Syndrome are met following
 the ingestion of a substance, these conditions are diagnosed, because Intoxica-
 tion is a residual category.
     Many neurological diseases can produce symptoms, such as slurred speech
 and incoordination, that resemble an Intoxication.

   Diagnostic criteria for Intoxication
   A. Development of a substance-specific syndrome that follows the recent
   ingestion and presence in the body of a substance.

   Bv Maladaptive behavior during the waking state due to the effect of the
   substance on the central nervous system, e.g., impaired judgment, bel-
   ligerence,

   C The clinical picture does not correspond to any of the specific Organic
   Brain Syndromes, such as Delirium, Organic Delusional Syndrome, Or-
   ganic Hallucinosis, or Organic Affective Syndrome,

 Withdrawal
 The essential feature is the development of a substance-specific syndrome that
 follows the cessation of or reduction in intake of a substance that was previously
 regularly used by the individual to induce a physiological state of intoxication.*
 Evidence for the cessation or reduction of regular use of a substance may be
 obtained by history or by laboratory tests of urine or blood. The clinical picture
 does not correspond to any of the specific Organic Brain Syndromes, such as
 Delirium, Organic Hallucinosis, Organic Delusional Syndrome, and Organic
 Affective Syndrome. (Withdrawal may, however, be superimposed on any
 Organic Brain Syndrome with the exception of Delirium.)
    As used here, the concept of Withdrawal is a residual category for a clini-
cal picture caused by cessation of or reduction in intake of a substance that does
not correspond to any of the specific Organic Brain Syndromes. Thus, a clinical
 syndrome of clouding of consciousness and tactile hallucinations following cessa-
tion of alcohol use is diagnosed as Alcohol Withdrawal Delirium, and only the
milder clinical picture associated with cessation of alcohol use is termed Alcohol
Withdrawal.
    The syndrome that develops varies according to the substance the individ-
ual was using. Common symptoms include anxiety, restlessness, irritability, in-
somnia, and impaired attention.

    Associated features. The nature of the substance determines the associated
features, which may range from disturbing physiological symptoms, such as
nausea and vomiting following cessation of heavy alcohol intake, to diffuse ma-

   * Strictly speaking, in the case of the fetal alcohol syndrome, it is the mother, and not the infant,
who has ingested the substance for the purpose of inducing intoxication.


                                       Organic Mental Disorders 123

laise, such as that following chronic use of certain sedatives, or compelling de-
sire to resume taking the substance. There may be changes in sleep patterns and
mood, as can be seen after withdrawal from amphetamines or corticosteroids, or
convulsions after Barbiturate Withdrawal.

    Course. Withdrawal is usually self-limited to no more than a few days or,
at most, several weeks, except when complicated by the development of a spe-
cific Organic Brain Syndrome, such as a Delirium.

    Impairment. Impairment varies from mild, as in Tobacco Withdrawal, to
severe, as may be the case in Alcohol or Opioid Withdrawal.

    Complications. In order to avoid painful withdrawal symptoms, the indi-
vidual may continue to use the substance. Illegal behavior, such as stealing to
pay for heroin, may result from efforts to obtain the substance.

    Differential diagnosis. Many physical disorders have symptoms that are
similar to the symptoms of Withdrawal. For example, the symptoms of influenza
are very similar to the symptoms of Opioid Withdrawal.

  Diagnostic criteria for Withd rawal
  A, Development of a substdn^-s^clic syndrome that follows th:e cessa-
  tion of or reduction in intake of1 a-substance that was previously regu-
  larly used by the individual to induce a state of intoxication.

  B. The clinical picture does ri^t wres|>ftnd to any of the specific Organic
  Brain Syndromes, such as pjellrlyrrtr Qrganic DelusionalSyndrome,
  Organic Hallucinosis, or Organic'Affective Syndrome.

Atypical or mixed organic brain syndrome
This is a residual category reserved for syndromes that do not meet the criteria
for any of the other Organic Brain Syndromes and in which there are maladap-
tive changes during the waking state with evidence, from either physical exam-
ination, laboratory tests, or history, of a specific organic factor that is judged
to be etiologically related to the disturbance. An example would be the "neur-
asthenic" picture associated with early Addison's Disease.
    This category should also be used when the individual has an Organic Brain
Syndrome with features of more than one syndrome but not enough of any one
to meet the criteria for a single syndrome.

  Diagnostic criteria for Atypical or Mixed Organic Brain Syndrome,
  A. The disturbance occurs during th$ waking state and: dogsr.no!: fulfil
  the criteria for any of the previously described Organic 6fain Syndromes.


124 Diagnostic Categories

  B. Evidence, from the history, physical examination, or laboratory tests, of
  a specific organic factor that is judged to be etiologicaliy related to the
  disturbance.

            ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS—SECTION 1
Organic Mental Disorders in which the etiology or pathophysiological process is
listed below (taken from the mental disorders section of ICD-9-CM).
    This section consists of two groups of disorders of organic etiology that are
traditionally classified as mental disorders: the first category includes Dementias
due to certain neurological diseases characteristically appearing in the senium
and presenium; the second is composed of Substance-induced Organic Mental
Disorders.

       DEMENTIAS ARISING IN THE SENIUM AND PRESENIUM
The Dementias associated with Alzheimer's and Pick's diseases have been re-
ferred to as Senile and Presenile Dementias, the former arbitrarily signifying an
age at onset over 65. Since nearly all cases of these Dementias are associated
with Alzheimer's disease and the identification of Alzheimer's and Pick's diseases
is largely or entirely dependent on histopathological data, it seems more useful
to have in a clinical classification of mental disorders a single category that en-
compasses the syndrome of Primary Degenerative Dementia. This category is
subtyped according to the age at onset, for the purpose of historical continuity
and to maintain comparability with ICD-9-CM. The clinician will rarely be in a
position to identify the specific associated neurological disorder. When such in-
formation is available, it should be noted on Axis III.
    In DSM-II, the Dementia associated with vascular disease was called Psy-
chosis with Cerebral Arteriosclerosis. However, the severity of the disorder ap-
pears to be related to repeated infarcts of the brain rather than to the extent of
cerebral arteriosclerosis. At autopsy the brain shows multiple infarcts of various
ages. For this reason, this category is here termed Multi-infarct Dementia.
    When a Dementia is due to some other known disease, such as a brain
tumor, Huntington's chorea, or vitamin B-12 deficiency, the specific disease
should be noted on Axis III, and the presence of a Dementia, on Axis I (294.10
Dementia, from Section 2 of this chapter, p. 162).

290.xx Primary Degenerative Dementia
The essential feature is the presence of Dementia of insidious onset and grad-
ually progressive course for which all other specific causes have been excluded
by the history, physical examination, and laboratory tests. The Dementia in-
volves a multifaceted loss of intellectual abilities, such as memory, judgment,
abstract thought, and other higher cortical functions, and changes in personality
and behavior. (See p. 107 for a description of the essential and associated fea-
tures of Dementia.)

    Phenomenological subtypes. Frequently the clinical picture may be compli-


                                       Organic Mental Disorders 125

cated by the presence of significant depressive features or of delusions, usually
persecutory. More rarely there may be a superimposed Delirium. These addi-
tional features, when present, should be noted with the appropriate codes
(p. 126).

    Age at onset. Senile onset (after age 65) is much more common than pre-
senile onset. Few cases develop before the age of 49.

    Course. The onset is insidious, and the course is one of uniform, gradual
progression. In the early stages memory impairment may be the only apparent
cognitive deficit. There may also be subtle personality changes, such as the de-
velopment of apathy, lack of spontaneity, and a quiet withdrawal from social
interactions. Individuals usually remain neat and well-groomed and, aside from
an occasional irritable outburst, are cooperative and behave in a socially appro-
priate way. With progression to the middle stage of the disease, various cogni-
tive disturbances become quite apparent, and behavior and personality are more
obviously affected. By the late stage, the individual may be completely mute and
inattentive. At this point he or she is totally incapable of caring for himself or
herself. This stage leads inevitably to death. With senile onset, the average dura-
tion of symptoms, from onset to death, is about five years.

    Impairment and complications. See Dementia, p. 110.

    Pathology. In the majority of cases, the brain is atrophied, with widened
cortical sulci and enlarged cerebral ventricles. This may be demonstrated in life
by computer-assisted tomography or pneumoencephalography. Microscopic ex-
amination usually reveals three histopathological changes: senile plaques, neuro-
fibrillary tangles, and granulovacuolar degeneration of neurons. These are the
changes classically described in Alzheimer's disease. Rare cases have the histo-
logical features of Pick's disease, mixed vascular and degenerative disease, or
nonspecific pathological changes.

    Predisposing factors. Down's syndrome predisposes to Alzheimer's disease.

    Prevalence. Between 2% and 4% of the population over the age of 65 is esti-
mated to have Primary Degenerative Dementia. The prevalence increases with
increasing age, particularly after 75.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is more common in women than in men.

    Familial pattern. First-degree relatives are four times more likely to develop
the disease than members of the general population. In rare cases, Primary De-
generative Dementia of the Alzheimer's type is inherited as a dominant trait.

    Differential diagnosis. The normal process of aging has been associated in a
number of studies with certain decrements in intellectual functioning. The na-
ture and significance of these changes are controversial. The diagnosis of Pri-


126 Diagnostic Categories

mary Degenerative Dementia should be limited to cases in which there is clear
evidence of progressive and significant deterioration of intellectual and social or
occupational functioning. (See Dementia, differential diagnosis, p. 110, for dis-
cussion.)
    Subdural hematoma, normal-pressure hydrocephalus, cerebral neoplasm,
Parkinson's disease, vitamin B12 deficiency, hypothyroidism, substance intoxica-
tion, and other specific and possibly treatable physical disorders that may cause
Dementia need to be ruled out by the history, physical examination, and appro-
priate laboratory tests.
    In Multi-infarct Dementia the clinical course is more variable and typically
progresses in stepwise fashion with focal neurological signs and systemic evi-
dence of vascular disease. In occasional cases, the two disorders may coexist, and
both diagnoses should be recorded.
    Elderly individuals with a major depressive episode may have features
strongly suggesting Dementia. For a discussion of this important problem in
differential diagnosis, see major depressive episode (p. 212) and Dementia (p.
111).

Subtypes
Primary Degenerative Dementia, Senile Onset (after age 65)
290.30 with delirium

290.20 with delusions

290.21 with depression

290.00 uncomplicated

Primary Degenerative Dementia, Presenile Onset (age 65 and below)
290.11 with delirium

290.12 with delusions

290.13 with depression

290.10 uncomplicated

  Diagnostic criteria for Primary Degenerative Dementia
  A< Dementia (see p. 111).


  B. Insidious onse, , t with uniforml,-,,#y progressiv» «**, e deterioratin, g\JF  course.

  C Exclusion of ai:l other specific causes of Dementia by the history,
  physical exarnination, anti laboratory tests.


                                       Organic Mental Disorders 127

290.4x Multi-infarct Dementia
The essential feature of this Dementia is a stepwise deterioration in intellectual
functioning that early in the course leaves some intellectual functions relatively
intact ("patchy" deterioration).
    Focal neurological signs and symptoms are also present, and there is evi-
dence of significant cerebrovascular disease that is judged to be etiologically
related to the disturbance.
    The onset is typically abrupt; and the course is stepwise and fluctuating,
with rapid changes, rather than uniformly progressive. The pattern of deficits is
"patchy," depending upon which regions of the brain have been destroyed. Cer-
tain cognitive functions may be affected early while others remain relatively un-
impaired. The Dementia typically involves disturbances in memory, abstract
thinking, judgment, impulse control, and personality. See Dementia, p. 107.
    The focal neurological signs commonly seen include weaknesses in the
limbs, reflex asymmetries, extensor plantar responses, dysarthria, and small
stepped gait.
    Vascular disease is always presumed to be present and responsible for both
the Dementia and the focal neurological signs. Evidence of cerebral and systemic
vascular disease may be apparent on physical examination. Frequently there will
be hypertension, carotid bruit, funduscopic abnormalities, or an enlarged heart.
These conditions should be noted on Axis III.

    Associated features. Pseudobulbar palsy, with fleeting episodes of laughing
and crying (sham emotion), dysarthria, and dysphagia is very common. There
may be periods of increased confusion, possibly related to further vascular in-
sults.

    Age at onset. The onset of Multi-infarct Dementia is apparently earlier than
that of Primary Degenerative Dementia.

    Course. As noted above, the course is erratic. Early treatment of hyperten-
sion and vascular disease may prevent further progression.

    Pathology. The brain shows multiple and extensive localized areas of soft-
ening. There may also be a variety of pathological changes in the cerebral vessels.

    Predisposing factors. The most significant factor is arterial hypertension.
Extracranial vascular disease of the great vessels in the neck and valvular disease
of the heart may be sources of cerebral emboli.

    Prevalence. Multi-infarct Dementia is apparently much less common than
Primary Degenerative Dementia.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is apparently more common in men.

    Familial pattern. No information.


 128 Diagnostic Categories

     Differential diagnosis. A single stroke may cause a relatively circumscribed
 change in the mental state, such as an aphasia following damage to the left
 hemisphere, or an Amnestic Syndrome from infarction in the region of the pos-
 terior cerebral arteries. As a general rule, a single stroke does not cause Demen-
 tia. Multi-infarct Dementia results from the occurrence of multiple strokes, at
 different times.
     In Primary Degenerative Dementia the course is uniformly progressive
 rather than stepwise as in Multi-infarct Dementia, and there is usually no evi-
 dence of cerebrovascular disease. In some instances both Multi-infarct Demen-
 tia and Primary Degenerative Dementia may coexist, with clinical features of
 both entities. In such cases both diagnoses should be recorded.

 Subtypes
Multi-infarct Dementia
290.41 with delirium

290.42 with delusions

290.43 with depression

290.40 uncomplicated

  Diagnostic criteria for Multi-infarct Dementia
  A. Dementia (see p. 111).

  B. Stepwise deteriorating course (i.e., not uniformly progressive) with
  "patchy" distribution of deficits (i.e., affecting some functions, but not
  others) early in the course.

  C. Focal neurological signs and symptoms (e.g., exaggeration of deep
  tendon reflexes, extensor plantar response, pseudobulbar palsy, gait ab-
  normalities, weakness of an extremity, etc.).

  D. Evidence, from the history, physical examination, or laboratory tests,
  of significant cerebrovascular disease that is judged to be etiologically
  related to the disturbance.

       SUBSTANCE-INDUCED ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS*
This section of the classification deals with the various Organic Brain Syn-
dromes caused by the direct effects on the nervous system of various substances.
They are distinguished from the Substance Use Disorders that refer to the be-
havior associated with taking substances that affect the central nervous system.

   * In order for the DSM-III classification to be compatible with ICD-9-CM, some diagnoses in this
subclass share the same code number. Non-ICD-9-CM codes are provided in parentheses in the
classification (Chapter 1) for use when greater specificity is necessary.


                                       Organic Mental Disorders 129

In most cases the diagnosis of these Organic Mental Disorders will be made in
individuals who also have a Substance Use Disorder.
    This section includes those Substance-induced Organic Mental Disorders
caused by the ten classes of substances that most commonly are taken nonmedic-
inally to alter mood or behavior: alcohol, barbiturates or similarly acting seda-
tives or hypnotics, opioids, cocaine, amphetamines or similarly acting sympa-
thomimetics, phencyclidine (PCP) or similarly acting arylcyclohexylamines,
hallucinogens, cannabis, tobacco, and caffeine. Although some of these sub-
stances also have a legitimate medicinal purpose, they may under unsupervised
circumstances cause Organic Mental Disorders. In addition, there is a residual
class for Organic Mental Disorders caused by other or unknown substances.
    For each class of substances, the specific disorders described represent the
types of Organic Brain Syndrome known to be caused by that class of substance.
For example, whereas alcohol causes many different syndromes, the current evi-
dence suggests that cocaine causes only one.
    The descriptions of these disorders often do not include many categories of
information, such as age at onset, predisposing factors, prevalence, and sex ratio.
This information is frequently available in the corresponding portion of the Sub-
stance Use Disorder section. The description of Impairment for each of the indi-
vidual Organic Brain Syndromes can be found in the preceding section. For many
of the Substance-induced Organic Mental Disorders, a predisposing factor is
prolonged heavy use with the development of dependence. Since this is obvious,
only other predisposing factors are noted, when known.

    Recording specific diagnoses. Whenever possible the clinician should record
the name of the specific substance rather than the name of the entire class of
substances, using the code number for the appropriate class. Examples: the
clinician should write 305.70 Amphetamine Intoxication (rather than Ampheta-
mine or Similarly Acting Sympathomimetic Intoxication); 292.00 Valium
Withdrawal (rather than Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hypnotic
Withdrawal); 292.81 Atropine Delirium (rather than Other or Unspecified
Substance Delirium).

ALCOHOL ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS
This section includes the following Organic Mental Disorders attributed to the
ingestion of alcohol: Alcohol Intoxication, Alcohol Idiosyncratic Intoxication,
Alcohol Withdrawal, Alcohol Withdrawal Delirium, Alcohol Hallucinosis, Alco-
hol Amnestic Disorder and Dementia Associated with Alcoholism.
    Although ICD-9-CM has a category for Alcoholic Jealousy, the literature
does not provide sufficient evidence to support the existence of this syndrome as
an independent entity. The concept "alcoholic jealousy" can be expressed in
DSM-III terms by a diagnosis of Alcohol Dependence and an additional diag-
nosis of a Paranoid Disorder.

303.00 Alcohol Intoxication
The essential feature is maladaptive behavior due to the recent ingestion of


130 Diagnostic Categories

alcohol. This may include aggressiveness, impaired judgment, and other manifes-
tations of impaired social or occupational functioning. Characteristic physiologi-
cal signs include flushed face, slurred speech, unsteady gait, nystagmus, and in-
coordination. Characteristic psychological signs include loquacity, impaired atten-
tion, irritability, euphoria, depression, and emotional lability.
    The diagnosis is not made when there is evidence that the amount of alco-
hol ingested was insufficient to cause intoxication in most people, as in Alcohol
Idiosyncratic Intoxication (p. 132).

    Associated features. The individual's usual behavior may be accentuated or
altered. For example, an individual who tends to be somewhat suspicious may,
under the influence of alcohol, become markedly paranoid. On the other hand,
individuals who are ordinarily withdrawn and uncomfortable in social situations
may become exceptionally convivial.
    Alcohol Intoxication is sometimes associated with an amnesia for the events
that occurred during the course of the intoxication ("blackouts").

    Course. Although alcohol is basically a central nervous system depressant,
its initial behavioral effects are often viewed as "disinhibitory" phenomena.
Thus, early in the course of Alcohol Intoxication, an individual may appear ex-
ceptionally bright, expansive, and hyperactive, with a subjective sensation of
well-being and increased mental sharpness. With further intoxication, however,
the individual may slow down and become depressed, withdrawn, and dull, and
even lose consciousness.
    The duration of an episode of Alcohol Intoxication depends on a variety of
factors, including the amount and type of alcoholic beverage consumed, how
rapidly it was ingested, and whether or not it was taken with food. Since only
a small percentage of alcohol is excreted, the rate at which alcohol is metabo-
lized—approximately 5-10 ml per hour—plays a very important role in deter-
mining the length of a period of intoxication. The development of short-term
tolerance may also influence the course of Alcohol Intoxication so that a person
may appear less intoxicated after many hours of drinking than after a few hours.
There is considerable individual variation in susceptibility to intoxication with
alcohol. Some individuals show intoxication with blood alcohol levels as low as
30 mg % whereas others appear unintoxicated with levels as high as 150 mg %.
    The signs of intoxication are more marked when the blood alcohol level is
rising than when it is falling. Most individuals become intoxicated at blood alco-
hol levels between 100 and 200 mg %. Death has been reported with levels
ranging from 400 to 700 mg %. Alcohol exerts its fatal effect either by a direct
depression of respiration or by aspiration of vomitus.

    Complications. Highway accidents are a major complication of Alcohol In-
toxication. At least half of all highway fatalities involve either a driver or a
pedestrian who has been drinking. Intoxication also results in falls and numer-
ous household and industrial accidents. Moreover, it is frequently associated
with the commission of criminal acts. More than one-half of all murderers and
their victims are believed to be intoxicated at the time of the act. One study in-


                                        Organic Mental Disorders 131

 dicates that about one-fourth of all suicides occur while the individual is drink-
 ing alcohol.
    Alcohol Intoxication frequently results in physical disorders. Falls and acci-
dents result in fractures, subdural hematomas, and other forms of brain trauma.
Exposure to extreme weather leads to frostbite and sunburn. Alcohol Intoxica-
 tion may also possibly suppress immune mechanisms and thus predispose to in-
 fections.

    Differential diagnosis. Social drinking is associated with physiological in-
 toxication. Maladaptive behavior is required for the mental disorder Alcohol
 Intoxication to be diagnosed.
    Intoxication due to barbiturates and similarly acting sedatives and hypnotics
has the same clinical picture as Alcohol Intoxication. Since an individual may be
taking both alcohol and other substances, the presence of alcohol on the breath
does not exclude the possibility that another substance is responsible for the
intoxication.
    Certain neurological diseases, such as cerebellar ataxias or multiple sclerosis,
may have some of the physiological signs and symptoms of Alcohol Intoxication.
    In Alcohol Idiosyncratic Intoxication, a marked change in behavior follows
ingestion of an amount of alcohol that is insufficient to cause Alcohol Intoxica-
tion in most individuals.

   Diagnostic criteria for Alcohol Intoxication
  A. Recent ingestion of alcohol (with no evidence suggesting that the
  amount was insufficient to cause intoxication in most people).

  B. Maladaptive behavioral effects, e.g., fighting, impaired judgment, inter-
  ference with social or occupational functioning,

  C. At least one of the following physiological signs:

     "(1) slurred speech
      (2) incoordination
      (3) unsteady gait
      (4) nystagmus
      (5) flushed face

  D. At least one of the following psychological signs:

      (1) mood change
      (2) irritability
      (3) loquacity
      (4) impaired attention

  E. Not due to any other physical or mental disorder.


132 Diagnostic Categories

291.40 Alcohol Idiosyncratic Intoxication
The essential feature is a marked behavioral change—usually to aggressive-
ness—that is due to the recent ingestion of an amount of alcohol insufficient to
induce intoxication in most people. There is usually subsequent amnesia for the
period of intoxication. The behavior is atypical of the person when not drink-
ing—for example, a shy, retiring, mild-mannered person may, after one weak
drink, become belligerent and assaultive. During the episode the individual seems
out of contact with others.
    This disorder has also been called "Pathological Intoxication."

    Age at onset. No information.

    Course. The change in behavior begins either while the individual is drink-
ing or shortly thereafter. The duration is quite brief, and the condition ceases
within a few hours. The individual returns to his or her normal state as the blood
alcohol level falls.

    Prevalence. Apparently extremely rare.

    Complications. The individual may do harm to himself or herself or to
others.

    Predisposing factors. A small percentage of individuals with this disorder
have been reported to have temporal lobe spikes on an electroencephalogram
after receiving small amounts of alcohol. Although the reports are still anecdotal,
it is thought that people with brain damage lose "tolerance" for alcohol and be-
have abnormally after drinking small amounts. The types of brain injury most
often associated with this syndrome are from trauma and encephalitis. The loss
of tolerance may be temporary or permanent. It is also reported that individuals
who are unusually fatigued or have a debilitating physical illness may have a
low tolerance for alcohol and respond inappropriately to small amounts.

    Differential diagnosis. Other exogenous agents, especially barbiturates and
similarly acting substances, may occasionally cause abrupt changes in behavior.
Temporal lobe epilepsy, during the interictal period, may be associated with fits
of destructive rage. In Malingering, the individual may wish to avoid responsi-
bility for aggressive behavior, claiming that it occurred while he or she was in-
toxicated from a small amount of alcohol.

  Diagnostic criteria for Alcohol Idiosyncratic Intoxication
  A. Marked behavioral change, e.g., aggressive or assaultive behavior that
  is due to the recent ingestion'of an amount of alcohol insufficient to
  induce intoxication in most people.

  B. The behavior is atypical of the person when not drinking.

  C. Not due to any other physical or mental disorder.


                                        Organic Mental Disorders 133

 291.80 Alcohol Withdrawal
 The essential features are certain characteristic symptoms such as a coarse
 tremor of the hands, tongue, and eyelids, nausea and vomiting, malaise or weak-
 ness, autonomic hyperactivity (such as tachycardia, sweating, and elevated blood
 pressure), anxiety, depressed mood or irritability, and orthostatic hypoten-
 sion, that follow within several hours cessation of or reduction in alcohol inges-
 tion by an individual who has been drinking alcohol for several days or longer.
 The diagnosis is not made if the disturbance is Alcohol Withdrawal Delirium.

     Associated features. Headache and dry mouth, not necessarily due to dehy-
 dration, are frequent symptoms. The complexion is often puffy and blotchy, and
 there may be mild peripheral edema. When nausea and vomiting are present,
 there may also be gastritis.
     Sleep is often fitful and disturbed by "bad dreams." These merge with a
 variety of misperceptions and illusions. Brief, poorly formed hallucinations, oc-
 curring in any modality of sensation, may be experienced.

     Age at onset. Most individuals with Alcohol Dependence begin drinking
 early in life and develop their first withdrawal symptoms in their 30s or 40s.

    Course. Withdrawal symptoms begin shortly after cessation of or reduction
 in drinking and almost always disappear within five to seven days, unless Alco-
 hol Withdrawal Delirium develops.

    Complications. Major motor seizures ("rum fits") may occur. Individuals
with a preexisting history of epilepsy are more apt to develop withdrawal
 seizures.

    Predisposing factors. Malnutrition, fatigue, depression, and concomitant
 physical illness may aggravate the syndrome.

    Differential diagnosis. In Alcohol Withdrawal Delirium there are a clouded
state of consciousness and other symptoms characteristic of Delirium.
    In Alcohol Hallucinosis the hallucinations are prominent and persistent
whereas if they occur in Alcohol Withdrawal, they are brief and poorly formed.
    Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hypnotic Withdrawal produces
a syndrome essentially identical with that of Alcohol Withdrawal. Hypogly-
cemia, whether or not related to alcohol, and diabetic ketoacidosis result in
symptoms similar to those of Alcohol Withdrawal. Essential tremor may sug-
gest the tremulousness of Alcohol Withdrawal.

  Diagnostic criteria for Alcohol Withdrawal
  :A, ^estettoit^erredi|£Bo        nifft;hti^.$rokn$ge^^^      ^
  ingesifOfi-of - alc9h<M» fettowed. wilhin~»eirfitei» ^i^^^mms^M
  ^hawis, tohgoe^an^ eyelids and-at least one:0f tN?Woftlflg: :•'


134 Diagnostic Categories

      (1) nausea and vomiting
      (2) malaise or weakness
      (3) autonomic hyperactivity, e.g., tachycardia, sweating, elevated
      blood pressure
      (4) anxiety
      {5} depressed mood or irritability
      (6) orthostatic hypotension

  B, Not due to any other physical or mental disorder such as Alcohol
  Withdrawal Delirium,

291.00 Alcohol Withdrawal Delirium
The essential feature is a Delirium (p. 104) that is due to recent cessation of or
reduction in alcohol consumption. Autonomic hyperactivity, such as tachycardia
and sweating, and elevated blood pressure, is present. Delusions, vivid hallucina-
tions, and agitated behavior usually occur. Hallucinations, when present, are
usually visual, but may occur in other sensory modalities.
    This disorder has been called "delirium tremens."

    Associated features. A coarse, irregular tremor is almost always present.
Fever may also occur.

    Age at onset. The first episode of this disorder usually occurs after 5 to 15
years of heavy drinking, usually episodic. For this reason, the disorder usually
first occurs in the person's 30s or 40s.

    Course. The onset is usually on the second or third day after the cessation
of or reduction in drinking. Occasionally it occurs earlier; it rarely appears more
than a week after abstinence. Unless complicated by some other illness, the syn-
drome most often runs its course in two to three days. If seizures also occur as
the result of Alcohol Withdrawal ("rum fits"), they always precede the develop-
ment of Delirium.

    Complications. See Delirium (p. 106).

    Predisposing factors. The presence of a concomitant physical illness may
predispose to this syndrome.

    Prevalence. This syndrome is much less common than Alcohol Withdrawal.
In one study, no more than 5% of patients admitted to a general hospital for
Alcohol Dependence had Alcohol Withdrawal Delirium.

    Differential diagnosis. See Delirium (p. 106).


                                       Organic Mental Disorders 135

  Diagnostic criteria for Alcohol Withdrawal Delirium
  A, Delirium (p, 107} occurs within one week after cessation of or re-
  duction in heavy alcohol ingestton.

  8. Autonomic hyperactivity, e.g., tachycardia, sweating, elevated blood
  pressure.

  C. Not due to any other physical or mental disorder.

291.30 Alcohol Hallucinosis
The essential feature is an Organic Hallucinosis (see p. 115) with vivid audi-
tory hallucinations following cessation of or reduction in alcohol ingestion by an
individual who apparently has Alcohol Dependence. The hallucinations are
usually voices, and less commonly unformed sounds such as hissing or buzzing.
Onset may accompany a gradual decrease in blood alcohol levels toward the end
of an extended period of Intoxication; but it most often occurs soon after cessa-
tion of drinking, usually within the first 48 hours, although occasionally some-
what later.
    In the majority of cases, the content of the hallucinations is unpleasant and
disturbing. However, the hallucinatory content may be benign, leaving the indi-
vidual undisturbed. The voices may address the individual directly, but more
often they discuss him or her in the third person. When the voices are threaten-
ing, the individual may act to defend himself or herself by calling on the police
for protection, or arming against invaders. The actions of the individual are prac-
tically never the result of the hallucinations' commanding the individual to act
in a certain way, but rather are motivated by the desire to avoid disgrace, injury,
or other consequences of what the voices threaten.
    Associated features. Other signs of withdrawal following prolonged intoxi-
cation may occur, such as transient visual hallucinations, tremulousness, sei-
zures, and, in some cases, Delirium.

    Age at onset. Although first episodes have been reported in people in their
early to mid-20s, the more typical onset is about age 40, and follows 10 years or
more of heavy drinking.

    Course. Most frequently the disorder lasts only a few hours or days, typi-
cally, less than a week. In about 10% of cases, however, it may last several
weeks or months; in a few cases, a chronic form develops.
    With the evolution of the chronic form, which may be recognized as early
as a week after the onset of the illness, the individual becomes quiet and resigned
despite the fact that the hallucinations remain threatening and derogatory. Ideas
of reference and other poorly systematized persecutory delusions become promi-
nent. At this stage the illness may be clinically indistinguishable from Schizo-
phrenia, with vague and illogical thinking, tangential associations, and inappro-
priate affect. There is some evidence that the chronic form is more likely to
develop from repeated episodes of the disorder.


 136 Diagnostic Categories

    Impairment. Impairment may be severe, as the individual responds to the
hallucinations as though they were real.

    Complications. In an effort to avoid the consequences of threatening voices,
the individual may harm himself or herself or others.

    Predisposing factors. This disorder occurs only following prolonged, heavy
ingestion of alcohol in individuals who apparently have Alcohol Dependence.
Contrary to previously held beliefs, there is no evidence that Schizophrenia pre-
disposes to the development of this disorder.

    Prevalence. Apparently rare.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is apparently four times more common in males than
in females.

    Familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. In Schizophrenia there is no temporal relation of psy-
chotic symptoms to the cessation of alcohol use and there is a chronic course.
Moreover, the age at onset of Alcohol Hallucinosis is later than in Schizophrenia,
and both the family background and pre-illness personalities are not typical of
those for Schizophrenia.

  Diagnostic criteria for Alcohol Hallucinosis
  A. Organic Hallucinosis (see p, 116) with vivid auditory hallucinations
  developing shortly (usually within 48 hours) after cessation of or re-
  duction in heavy ingestion of aico.hof in an individual who apparently has
  Alcohol Dependence.

  B. Response to the hallucinations appropriate to their content, e.g.,
  anxiety in response to hallucinatory threats.

  C. No clouding of consciousness, as in Delirium,

  D. Not due to any other physical or mental disorder.

291.10 Alcohol Amnestic Disorder
The essential feature is an Amnestic Syndrome (see p. 112) due to the vita-
min deficiency associated with prolonged, heavy use of alcohol. Alcohol Amnestic
Disorder due to thiamine deficiency is also known as Korsakoff's Disease.

    Associated features. Neurological disturbances such as peripheral neuro-
pathy, cerebellar ataxia, or myopathy are among the associated features.


                                        Organic Mental Disorders 137

     Course. Alcohol Amnestic Disorder often follows an acute episode of Wer-
 nicke's encephalopathy, a neurological disease manifested by confusion, ataxia,
 eye-movement abnormalities (gaze palsies, nystagmus), and other neurological
 signs. Gradually these manifestations subside, but a major impairment of mem-
 ory, Alcohol Amnestic Disorder, remains. If Wernicke's disease is treated early
 with large doses of thiamine, Alcohol Amnestic Disorder may not develop.
     Once Alcohol Amnestic Disorder becomes established, it usually persists
 indefinitely. A slight degree of improvement over a long period of time may
 occur.

     Impairment. Impairment is usually quite severe, and life-long custodial care
 may be necessary.

     Complications. See Amnestic Syndrome, p. 113.

     Predisposing factors. Alcohol Dependence (by definition).

    Prevalence. The disorder is apparently rare, perhaps because of the routine
 administration of thiamine during detoxification.

    Differential diagnosis. In Dementia Associated with Alcoholism the distur-
 bance is not limited to memory impairment.
    See Amnestic Syndrome, p. 113.

  Diagnostic criteria for Alcohol Amnestic Disorder
  A, Amnestic Syndrome (see p. 113) following prolonged heavy ingestion
  of alcohol.

  8, Not due to any other physical or mental disorder.

291.2x Dementia Associated with Alcoholism
The essential feature is a Dementia (see p. 107) associated with prolonged and
heavy ingestion of alcohol for which all other causes of Dementia have been ex-
cluded. In order to exclude transient effects of Intoxication and Withdrawal, this
diagnosis should not be made until at least three weeks have elapsed since the
cessation of alcohol use.
    The etiologic role of alcohol in the Dementia associated with prolonged
heavy ingestion of alcohol is controversial.

    Subtyping. The severity of the Dementia is noted in the fifth digit (see be-
low). The severe form corresponds to what was called Alcoholic Deterioration in
DSM-II. Both the severe and the mild forms of this entity have been described by
various studies in the literature. What has been termed "moderate" represents a
theoretical intermediate stage. It is not established whether these forms repre-


 138 Diagnostic Categories

 sent different points along a continuum, or whether the mild and the severe
 forms have different pathophysiologies.

     Associated features. See Alcohol Dependence (p. 169) and Dementia
 (p. 109).

    Age at onset. This syndrome rarely begins before the age of 35 since many
 years of heavy drinking are apparently necessary to produce Dementia.

    Course. No information.

    Impairment. Mild cognitive deficits demonstrable only by psychological
 testing have been reported in some individuals with Alcoholism. As this diagno-
 sis involves a Dementia, by definition there is always some impairment in social
 or occupational functioning. When impairment is severe, the individual becomes
 totally oblivious of his or her surroundings and requires constant care.

    Complications. See Dementia, p. 110.

    Predisposing factors. Alcohol Dependence (by definition).

    Prevalence. Mild, sometimes reversible, intellectual impairment is commonly
found when a specific search is made in individuals with chronic Alcohol De-
pendence. The severe form of this disorder is apparently rare.

    Differential diagnosis. Dementia Associated with Alcoholism is distin-
guished from Alcohol Amnestic Disorder by the presence of cognitive deficits
other than in the sphere of memory alone. It is distinguished from other causes
of Dementia by the failure to demonstrate a specific etiology other than alcohol
abuse. For the differential diagnosis of Dementia, see p. 110.

  Diagnostic criteria for Dementia Associated with Alcoholism
  A, Dementia (see p. 111) following prolonged, heavy ingestion of
  alcohol,

  8. Dementia persisting at least three weeks after cessation of alcohol
  ingestion.

  C. Exclusion of all other causes of Dementia, other than prolonged, heavy
  use of alcohol, by the history, physical examination, and laboratory
  tests.

Severity criteria for the Dementia
291.21 Mild
No more than mild impairment in social and occupational functioning.


                                       Organic Mental Disorders 139

291.22 Moderate
Moderate social impairment with inability to function occupationally.

291.23 Severe
Severe impairment of functioning with marked deterioration of personality
(irritability, social inappropriateness) and inability to function independently.

291.20 Unspecified

BARBITURATE OR SIMILARLY ACTING SEDATIVE OR HYPNOTIC
ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS
Included in this classification are disorders induced by barbiturates and similarly
acting sedatives and hypnotics.
    The common minor tranquilizers are the benzodiazepines, such as chlordia-
zepoxide, diazepam, and oxazepam. Common hypnotics include ethchlorvynol,
flurazepam, glutethimide, methyprylon, chloral hydrate, paraldehyde, and metha-
qualone.
    Although these substances differ widely in their rates of absorption, metab-
olism, distribution in the body, and likelihood of producing intoxication and
withdrawal, at some dose and at some duration of use they are all capable of
producing signs and symptoms of intoxication and withdrawal that are essen-
tially the same as those produced by the barbiturates. For this reason the barbi-
turates are the prototype for this group of substances.
    Substances in this class are usually taken orally in the form of pills or cap-
sules.
    Because of the great pharmacological differences in the substances covered
in this section and of the wide individual variation in responses to them, specific
doses for specific withdrawal syndromes are not listed.

305.40 Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hypnotic Intoxication
The essential and associated features are virtually identical with those of Alco-
hol Intoxication (see p. 129). The only exception is that there is no syndrome of
Idiosyncratic Intoxication. Differences that may occur between Alcohol Intoxica-
tion and Intoxication by this class of substances are most likely due to differ-
ences in the personalities of the individuals who become intoxicated and in the
settings in which the intoxications occur. For example, the settings in which
Alcohol Intoxication is apt to occur probably account for the greater likelihood
that it will be accompanied by displays of aggression or violence, compared with
intoxication by this class of substances.

    Course. As with Alcohol Intoxication, the initial behavioral effects are usu-
ally disinhibitory. If the individual continues to ingest the substance, inhibitory
effects will supervene.
    The factors involved in rapidity of onset and duration of the intoxication
are discussed in the text on Intoxication as an Organic Brain Syndrome (see
p. 121).


 140 Diagnostic Categories

    Complications. All of the complications noted for Alcohol Intoxication may
occur with this class of substances, although they are less commonly seen. From
initiation of regular barbiturate use to the development of physical dependence,
the margin between the intoxicating dose and the lethal dose progressively nar-
rows as the dose necessary for intoxication increases. The upper limit for the
lethal dose usually does not exceed 3.5 to 4.0 grams. Therefore, a fatal overdose
can be ingested accidentally. Unlike with Alcohol Intoxication, death is a more
frequent complication because the individual is able to take enough of the sub-
 stance over a short period of time to induce marked depression of central ner-
vous system function.

    Differential diagnosis. Other substances causing intoxication must be con-
sidered. Although breath odor may be an important differentiating clue with
alcohol and many inhalants, it should not be absolutely relied upon.
    Parenteral administration of naloxone or other opioid antagonists will alle-
viate the symptoms of Opioid Intoxication, but will have no effect on intoxica-
tions due to other substances.
    Reliable qualitative and quantitative tests for the presence in the blood and
urine of barbiturates and some of the other substances in this class may be use-
ful.

  Diagnostic criteria for Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hypnotic
  Intoxication
  A. Recent use of a barbiturate or similarly acting sedative or hypnotic.

  B. At least one of the following psychological signs:

      (1) mood lability
      (2) disinhibition of sexual and aggressive impulses
      (3) irritability
      (4) loquacity

  C At least one of the following neurological signs:

      (1) slurred speech
      (2) jncoordinatlon
      (3} unsteady gait
      (4) impairment in attention or memory

  D, Maladaptive behavioral effects, e.g., impaired judgment, interference
  with social or occupational functioning, failure to meet responsibilities,

  E. Not due to any other physical or merital disorder.

292.00 Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hypnotic Withdrawal
The essential features are virtually identical with those of Alcohol Withdrawal
(see p. 133). The only exception is that a coarse tremor is not invariably present.


                                   Organic Mental Disorders 141

  Diagnostic criteria for Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hypnotic
  Withdrawal
  A. Prolonged, heavy use of barbiturate or similarly acting sedative or
  hypnotic, or more prolonged use of smaller doses of a benzodiazepine.

  B. At least three of the following dye to recent cessation of or reduction
  in substance use:

      (1) nausea and vomiting
      (2) malaise or weakness

      (3) autonomic byperactivlty, egv tachycardia, sweating, elevated
     - -•• blood p
      (4) anxiety
      (5) depressed mood or Irritability
      (6) orthostatlc hypotension
      (7) coarse tremor-of hands>tqngue, and eyelids

  C. Not due to any other physical or menlaJ disorder^ such as Barbiturate
  or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hypnotic Withdrawal Delirium,

292.00 Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hypnotic Withdrawal
       Delirium
The essential feature is a Delirium (see p. 104) occurring within one week after
cessation of or reduction in heavy use of a barbiturate or similarly acting seda-
tive or hypnotic. All of the features are virtually identical with those of Alcohol
Withdrawal Delirium (see p. 134), but the disorder is apparently not as common.

  Diagnostic criteria for Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hyp-
  notic Withdrawal Delirium
  A. Delirium (see p. 107) within one week after cessation of or reduction
  in heavy use of a barbiturate or similarly acting sedative or hypnotic.

  B. Autonomic hyperactivity, e.g., tachycardia, sweating, elevated blood
  pressure.

  C. Not due to any other physical or mental disorder.

292.83 Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hypnotic Amnestic Disorder
The essential feature is an Amnestic Syndrome (see p. 112) due to prolonged
heavy use of a barbiturate or similarly acting sedative or hypnotic.


142 Diagnostic Categories

    Age at onset. There is some evidence that the age at onset is in the 20s. The
earlier onset compared with that of Alcohol Amnestic Disorder may be due to
the more common earlier age at onset of heavy use of this class of substances
compared with alcohol.

    Course. The course is variable. Unlike Alcohol Amnestic Disorder, full re-
covery may occur.

    Impairment, complications, and differential diagnosis. See Amnestic Syn-
drome, p. 113.

  Diagnostic criteria for Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hyp-
  notic Amnestic Disorder
  A. Prolonged, heavy use of a barbiturate or similarly acting sedative or
  hypnotic

  B. Amnestic Syndrome (see p. 113).

  C Not due to any other physical or mental disorder.

OPIOID ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS
This group includes natural opioids, such as heroin and morphine, and synthetics
with morphine-like action, such as meperidine and methadone. These substances
are taken either orally, intravenously, intranasally, or subcutaneously ("skin
popping").
    Although methadone is included in this class, individuals properly super-
vised in a methadone maintenance program should not develop any of the
Opioid Organic Mental Disorders. When they do meet the criteria for this diag-
nosis, this indicates that there has been nonmedical use of methadone, in which
case the appropriate diagnosis should be made.

305.50 Opioid Intoxication
The essential features are specific neurological and psychological signs and mal-
adaptive behavioral effects due to the recent use of an opioid.
    Psychological signs commonly present include euphoria or dysphoria,
apathy, and psychomotor retardation.
    Pupillary constriction is always present (or dilation due to anoxia from a
severe overdose). Other neurological signs commonly observed are drowsiness,
slurred speech, and impairment in attention and memory.
    The maladaptive behavioral effects may include impaired judgment, interfer-
ence with social or occupational functioning, and failure to meet responsibilities.

    Associated features. Pupillary constriction may lead to reduced visual acuity.
The inhibitory effect of the substance on gastrointestinal motility may cause con-
stipation. There may be analgesia.


                                       Organic Mental Disorders 143

    For many individuals, the effect of taking an opioid for the first time is
dysphoric rather than euphoric, and nausea and vomiting may result.

    Course. The factors involved in rapidity of onset and the duration of in-
toxication are discussed in the text on Intoxication as an Organic Brain Syndrome
 (p. 121).
    A single dose of morphine taken intravenously will reach its peak subjective
effect in 5 minutes or less. The effect lasts from 4 to 6 hours and is usually
followed by a "down" feeling.

    Complications. The most serious complication is opioid poisoning, mani-
fested by coma, shock, pinpoint pupils, and depressed respiration, with the pos-
sibility of death from respiratory arrest. This syndrome can be rapidly reversed
by intravenous administration of a narcotic antagonist such as naloxone, nalor-
phine, or levallorphan if this treatment is given before irreversible brain anoxia
has occurred.
    Other complications are similar to those of Alcohol Intoxication, but are
less commonly seen (see p. 130).

    Differential diagnosis. Other Substance-induced Intoxications may cause a
similar clinical picture. Barbiturates and alcohol are most likely to be confused
in this regard. Barbiturate and Alcohol Intoxication can be distinguished by the
absence of pupillary constriction in the latter and by the use of laboratory tests.
A mild Hallucinogen Hallucinosis may occasionally cause a similar picture.
Cocaine, amphetamines, and hallucinogens cause pupillary dilation; but unless
 the individual is in a state of severe intoxication, the possibility that this dila-
tion is a sign of Opioid Intoxication is unlikely.

   Diagnostic criteria for Opioid Intoxication
   A. Recent use of an opioid.

   8. Pupillary constriction (or pupillary dilation due to anoxia from severe
  overdose).

   C At least one of the following psychological signs:

       (1) euphoria
       (2) dysphoria
       (3) apathy
       (4) psychomotor retardation

   D. At least one of the following neurological signs:

       (1) drowsiness
       (2) slurred speech
       (3) impairment in attention or memory


144 Diagnostic Categories

  E. Maladaptive behavioral effects, e.g., impaired judgment, interference
  with social or occupational functioning.

   F, Not due to any other physical or mental disorder.

292.00 Opioid Withdrawal
The essential feature is a characteristic withdrawal syndrome due to recent cessa-
tion of or reduction in use of an opioid. The syndrome includes lacrimation,
rhinorrhea, pupillary dilation, piloerection, sweating, diarrhea, yawning, mild
hypertension, tachycardia, fever, and insomnia.
    The symptoms and signs of Opioid Withdrawal may be precipitated by the
abrupt cessation of opioid administration after a one- or two-week period of
continuous use or by administration of a narcotic antagonist (e.g., naloxone or
nalorphine) after therapeutic doses of an opioid given four times a day for as
short a period as three or four days.

    Associated features. Common associated features include restlessness, irrita-
bility, depression, tremor, weakness, nausea, vomiting, and muscle and joint
pains. These symptoms together with the symptoms noted above resemble the
clinical picture of influenza.
    Depending on the observer and the environment, there may be complaints,
pleas, demands, and manipulations all directed toward the goal of obtaining more
opioids. A need for analgesia may be simulated or the withdrawal symptoms
may be exaggerated.

    Course. Mild Opioid Withdrawal may occur after abrupt withdrawal of
analgesic doses of morphine after 7 to 10 days of administration. However, it is
relatively uncommon for opioid craving to occur in the context of analgesic ad-
ministration for pain from physical disorders or associated with surgery. The
withdrawal symptoms with full-blown craving for opioids usually occur second-
ary to abrupt withdrawal in individuals dependent on opioids. In the case of
morphine or heroin, the first withdrawal signs are usually noted within 6 to 8
hours of the previous dose, reach a peak on the second or third day, and disap-
pear in 7 to 10 days.
    The withdrawal syndrome from meperidine begins more quickly after the
last dose, reaches a peak within 8 to 12 hours, and is over within 4 or 5 days.
Methadone withdrawal may not begin for 1 to 3 days after the last dose,
and then may be relatively mild. The symptoms are usually over by the 10th to
14th day.
    Withdrawal symptoms from semisynthetic and synthetic opioids are quali-
tatively similar to those from morphine, the general rule being that substances
with a short duration of action tend to produce short, intense, withdrawal syn-
dromes whereas substances that are slowly eliminated produce withdrawal syn-
dromes that are prolonged but milder. However, narcotic antagonist-precipitated


                                        Organic Mental Disorders 145

 withdrawal following administration of long-acting substances can be quite
 severe.

     Complications. Death rarely occurs unless the individual has a severe physi-
 cal disorder, such as cardiac disease.

     Differential diagnosis. Influenza is remarkably similar in its clinical picture
 to Opioid Withdrawal.
     Other substance withdrawals and mixed withdrawals, especially Barbitu-
 rate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hypnotic Withdrawal, can be differentiated
 from Opioid Withdrawal by testing of blood and urine and by taking a careful
 history, bearing in mind that individuals giving such a history are often unrelia-
 ble. Third-party confirmation is extremely valuable.

   Diagnostic criteria for Opioid Withdrawal
   A. Prolonged, heavy use of an optaid (or administration of a narcotic
   antagonist following a briefer period of use).

   B. At least four of the following symptoms due to the recent cessation of
   or reduction in opiotd use:

       (1) lacrimation
       (2) rrtinorrhea
       (3) pupillary dilation
       (4) pjfoerection
       (5) sweating
       (6) diarrhea
       (7) yawning
       (8) mild hypertension
       (9) tachycardia
      (10) fever
      (11) insomnia

   C. Not due to any other physical or mental disorder.

COCAINE ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDER
Cocaine is usually applied to the mucous membrane of the nose by sniffing the
crystalline flakes or powder. Intravenous administration is sometimes preferred,
most commonly by opioid users who mix cocaine with heroin, a combination
referred to as "speedball." Cocaine "base" is smoked in pipes or cigarettes, and
has effects similar to cocaine taken intravenously.
    There is apparently no withdrawal syndrome.

305.60 Cocaine Intoxication
The essential features are specific psychological and physical symptoms and mal-
adaptive behavioral effects due to the recent use of cocaine. The psychological


146 Diagnostic Categories

symptoms typically include a sense of well-being and confidence, with height-
ened awareness of sensory input. There may be psychomotor agitation, elation,
grandiosity, loquacity, pacing about, and pressured speech. The physical symp-
toms include tachycardia, pupillary dilation, elevated blood pressure, perspira-
tion or chills, nausea and vomiting, anorexia, and insomnia. The psychological
and physical symptoms begin no longer than one hour after administration, and
may occur within a few minutes.
    The maladaptive behavioral effects may include fighting, impaired judg-
ment, and interference with social or occupational functioning.

    Associated features. If taken intravenously or smoked, cocaine produces a
characteristic "rush" of well-being and confidence. If the intoxication is severe,
there is likely to be confusion, rambling or even incoherent speech, anxiety, and
apprehension. There may be headache and palpitations. Intoxication with intra-
venous administration of high doses of cocaine may be associated with transient
ideas of reference, paranoid ideation, a subjective sense of "profound thoughts,"
increased sexual interest, ringing in the ears, hearing one's name called, and a
sensation of insects crawling up the skin (formication) or seeing insects. There
sometimes are increased curiosity and bizarre behavior, such as sorting objects
into various piles. Stereotyped movements of mouth and tongue are sometimes
noted.
    One hour or longer after the characteristic behavioral and physical effects
have subsided, anxiety, tremulousness, irritability, and feelings of fatigue and
depression often ensue. During this period, referred to as "crashing," there often
is a craving for more cocaine.

    Course. The course of Cocaine Intoxication is usually self-limited, with full
recovery within 24 hours.

    Complications. Syncope or chest pain may occur. There may be seizures
following large doses. Death may result from cardiac arrhythmias or respiratory
paralysis.

    Differential diagnosis. Manic episode may present with symptoms similar
to those seen in Cocaine Intoxication. Amphetamine Intoxication and Phencycli-
dine (PCP) Intoxication may cause a similar clinical picture, and can be distin-
guished from Cocaine Intoxication only by the presence of cocaine metabolites
in a urine specimen or cocaine in plasma.

  Diagnostic criteria for Cocaine Intoxication
  A. Recent use of cocaine.

  8. At least two of the following psychological symptoms within one hour
  of using cocaine;


                                        Organic Mental Disorders 147

       (1) psychomotor agitation
       (2) elation
       (3) grandiosity
       (4) loquacity
       (5) hypervigi lance

   C. At least two of the following symptoms within one hour of using
   cocaine:

       (1) tachycardia
       (2) pupillary dilation
       (3) elevated blood pressure
       (4) perspiration or chills
       (5) nausea and vomiting

   D. Maladaptive behavioral effects, f.g., fighting, impaired judgment,
   interference witti social or -occupational functioning.

   E. Not due to any other physical or mental disorder,


 AMPHETAMINE OR SIMILARLY ACTING SYMPATHOMIMETIC
 ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS
 This group includes all of the substances of the substituted phenylethylamine
 structure, such as amphetamine, dextroamphetamine, and methamphetamine
 ("speed"), and those with structures differing from the substituted phenylethyl-
 amine that have amphetamine-like action, such as methylphenidate or some sub-
 stances used as appetite suppressants ("diet pills"). These substances are taken
 orally or intravenously.

 305.70 Amphetamine or Similarly Acting Sympathomimetic Intoxication
 The essential features are specific psychological and physical symptoms and mal-
 adaptive behavioral effects due to the recent use of amphetamine or similarly
 acting sympathomimetic substances.
     All of the features (essential, associated, course, complications, and differ-
 ential diagnosis) are virtually identical with those of Cocaine Intoxication. One
 exception is that delusions or hallucinations are always transient in Cocaine
 Intoxication, whereas in the intoxication due to amphetamine or similarly acting
 sympathomimetic substances, they may persist beyond the time of direct sub-
 stance effect. When this occurs, the syndrome is then referred to as an Ampheta-
mine or Similarly Acting Sympathomimetic Delusional Disorder (p. 149). The
other exception is that on occasion an intoxication from this class of substances
may develop into a Delirium.


148 Diagnostic Categories

   Diagnostic criteria for Amphetamine or Similarly Acting Sympathomimetic
   Intoxication
  A. Recent use of amphetamine or similarly acting Sympathomimetic.

   8. Within one hour of use, at least two of the following psychological
  symptoms:

      (1) psychomotor agitation
      (2) elation
      (3) grandiosity
      (4) loquacity
       (5) hypervigilance

  C Within one hour of use, at least two of the following physical
  symptoms:

      (1) tachycardia
      (2) pupillary dilation
      (3) elevated blood pressure
      (4) perspiration or chills
      (5} nausea or vomiting

  D. Maladaptive behavioral effects, e.g., fighting/ impaired judgment, in-
  terference with social or occupational functioning*

  E. Not due to any other physical or mental disorder.

292.81 Amphetamine or Similarly Acting Sympathomimetic Delirium
The essential feature is a Delirium (p. 104) within 24 hours of intake of an am-
phetamine or similarly acting Sympathomimetic.

    Associated features. Tactile and olfactory hallucinations may be present.
Affect is often labile. Violent or aggressive behavior is common, and restraint
may be required.

    Course. Delirium usually occurs within one hour of substance use and is
over in about six hours. When the substance is taken intravenously, the onset
is almost immediate. More rarely the Delirium follows a period of intoxication.
When the other pharmacological effects of the substance have worn off, the
Delirium disappears completely.

    Complications. See Cocaine Intoxication, p. 146.

    Prevalence. This disorder is not as common as Amphetamine or Similarly
Acting Sympathomimetic Delusional Disorder.


                                        Organic Mental Disorders 149

     Differential diagnosis. See differential diagnosis of Delirium, p. 106.

   Diagnostic criteria for Amphetamine or Similiarly Acting Sympathomimetic
   Delirium

   A, .Delirium (p. 107) within 24 hours of use-of amphetamine or similarly
   acting sympathomirnelie.

   B. Not due to any other physical or mental disorder.

 292.11 Amphetamine or Similarly Acting Sympathomimetic Delusional
        Disorder
 The essential feature is an Organic Delusional Syndrome (p. 114) following re-
 cent use of an amphetamine or similarly acting Sympathomimetic during a period
 of long-term use of moderate or high doses of the substance. (The syndrome ap-
 parently does not develop following a single large dose unless preceded by
 chronic use.) The syndrome develops rapidly. Persecutory delusions are the pre-
 dominant clinical feature; in addition, there are ideas of reference, aggressive-
 ness and hostility, anxiety, or psychomotor agitation.

    Associated features. Distortion of body image and misperception of people's
 faces may occur. Initially, suspiciousness and curiosity may be experienced with
pleasure. However, suspiciousness and paranoid delusions may later induce ag-
gressive or violent action against "enemies." The hallucination of bugs or vermin
crawling in or under the skin (formication) can lead to scratching and extensive
skin excoriations.

    Course. Delusions can linger for a week or more, but occasionally last for
over a year.

    Impairment, complications, and differential diagnosis. See Organic Delu-
sional Syndrome, p. 114.

  Diagnostic criteria fof Amphetamine <w Similarly Acting Sympathomimetic
  Delusional Disorder
  A. Recent use of amphetamine or similarly acting Sympathomimetic dur-
  ing a period of long-term use of moderate or high doses,

  B. A rapidly developing syndrome consisting of persecutor^ delusions
  as the predominant clinical feature and at least three of the following;

      (1) ideas of reference
      (2) aggressiveness and hostility


150 Diagnostic Categories

      (3) anxiety
      (4) psychomotor agitation

  C. Not due to any other physical or mental disorder,

292.00 Amphetamine or Similarly Acting Sympathomimetic Withdrawal
The essential feature is a characteristic withdrawal syndrome due to recent cessa-
tion of or reduction in use of amphetamine or a similarly acting sympathomi-
metic. The syndrome always involves depressed mood, plus fatigue, disturbed
sleep, or increased dreaming.

    Associated features. If the depressed mood is severe, other symptoms of the
depressive syndrome, such as agitation or suicidal ideation, may be present. The
disturbed sleep is usually related to increased REM sleep activity, and may last
for weeks.

    Course. The syndrome develops within three days of cessation of or reduc-
tion in substance use. The symptoms reach a peak at two to four days, although
depression and irritability may persist for months.

    Complications. A Depressive Disorder and suicide are the major complica-
tions.

    Differential diagnosis. A coexisting Depressive Disorder should be consid-
ered if a depressive syndrome persists for several weeks.

  Diagnostic criteria for Amphetamine or Similarly Acting Sympathomimetic
  Withdrawal
  A. Prolonged heavy use of amphetamine or a similarly acting sympa-
  thomimetic.

  B. After cessation of or reduction in substance use, depressed mood and
  at least two of the following;

      (1) fatigue
      (2) disturbed sleep
      (3) increased dreaming

  C. Not due to any other physical or mental disorder, such as Ampheta-
  mine or Similarly Acting Sympathomimetic Delusional Disorder.

PHENCYCLIDINE (PCP) OR SIMILARLY ACTING
ARYLCYCLOHEXYLAMINE ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS
This group of substances includes phencyclidine and similarly acting compounds
such as ketamine (Ketalar) and the thiophene analogue of phencyclidine (TCP).


                                       Organic Mental Disorders 151

These substances can be taken orally or parenterally or can be smoked or in-
haled. Within this class of substances, phencyclidine is the most commonly used.
It is sold on the street under a variety of names, the most common of which
are PCP, PeaCe Pill, angel dust, THC, and crystal.

305.90 Phencyclidine or Similarly Acting Arylcylohexylamine Intoxication
The essential features are specific physical and psychological symptoms asso-
ciated with maladaptive behavioral effects due to the recent use of phencyclidine
or a similarly acting arylcyclohexylamine. The symptoms begin within one hour
of oral ingestion of the substance; if smoked, insufflated, or taken intravenously,
onset may be within 5 minutes. The physical symptoms include vertical and
horizontal nystagmus, elevated blood pressure, numbness or diminished respon-
siveness to pain, ataxia, dysarthria, and diaphoresis or increased salivation.
Psychological symptoms include euphoria, psychomotor agitation, anxiety, emo-
tional lability, grandiosity, a sensation of slowed time, and synesthesias (e.g.,
seeing colors when a loud sound occurs).
    The effects of this class of substance are generally dose related, although
there is great variability among individuals. The effects usually range from a
mild, "floaty" euphoria and numbness after ingesting less than 5 mg of phen-
cyclidine, to muscle rigidity, hypertension, and a noncommunicative state fol-
lowing a dose of 5-10 mg, and coma, convulsions, and possible death after a dose
of 20 mg or more of phencyclidine.

    Associated features. Intoxication may be accompanied by repetitive motor
movements, including facial grimacing, muscle rigidity on stimulation, and re-
peated episodes of vomiting. There may also be hallucinations, paranoid ideation,
and bizarre or violent behavior.

    Course. In most cases, individuals who are acutely confused following in-
gestion of phencyclidine or a similarly acting arylcyclohexylamine are alert and
oriented within 3-4 hours of admission to an emergency room. Chronic users of
phencyclidine report feeling intoxicated for 4-6 hours after ingesting the usual
"street" dose.

    Complications. Death from respiratory depression can occur following a
high dose. Suicide is not uncommon during acute intoxication. While an indi-
vidual is recovering from an intoxicated state, depression, irritability, and ner-
vousness often occur.

    Differential diagnosis. Other Substance-induced Intoxications that cause a
similar clinical picture, such as those due to amphetamines and hallucinogens,
may be ruled out by the presence of phencyclidine in the urine or plasma.

  Diagnostic criteria for Phencyclidine (PCP) or Similarly Acting Arylcyclo-
  hexylamine Intoxication
  A. Recent use of phencyclidine or a similarly acting arylcyclohexylamine.


152 Diagnostic Categories

  B. Within an hour (less when smoked, insufflated, or used intravenously),
  at least two of the following physical symptoms:
      (1) vertical or horizontal nystagmus
      (2) increased blood pressure and heart rate
      (3) numbness or diminished responsiveness to pain
      (4) ataxia
      (5) dysarthria

  C. Within one hour, at least two of the following psychological symp-
  toms:

      (1) euphoria
      (2) psychomotor agitation
      (3) marked anxiety
      (4) emotional lability
      (5) grandiosity
      (6) sensation of slowed time
      (7) synesthesias

  D. Maladaptive behavioral effects, e.g., belligerence, imputsivity, unpre-
  dictability, impaired judgment, assaultiveness.

  E. Not due to any other physical or mental disorder, e.g., Delirium.

292.81 Phencyclidine (PCP) or Similarly Acting Arylcyclohexylamine
       Delirium
The essential feature is a Delirium (p. 104) due to phencyclidine (PCP) or a simi-
larly acting arylcyclohexylamine. The Delirium may occur within 24 hours after
use or may emerge following recovery from an overdose days after the substance
has been taken.

    Associated features. See Phencyclidine Intoxication, p. 151.

    Course. The Delirium may last up to a week, with waxing and waning that
is probably a reflection of excretion into and reabsorption from the stomach.

    Complications. See Phencyclidine Intoxication, p. 151.

    Prevalence. This disorder is not as common as Intoxication from this class
of substances.

    Differential diagnosis. See differential diagnosis of Delirium, p. 106.


                                        Organic Mental Disorders 153

   Diagnostic criteria for Phencyclidine (PCP) or Similarly Acting Arylcyclo-
   hexylamine Delirium

   A. Delirium (p. 107) due to phencyclidine (PCP) or similarly acting aryl-
   cyclohexylamine.

   B. Not due to any other physical or mental disorder.

 292.90 Phencyclidine (PCP) or Similarly Acting Arylcyclohexylamine
        Mixed Organic Mental Disorder
 The essential feature is recent use of phencyclidine or a similarly acting arylcy-
 clohexylamine that has resulted in an illness that involves features of several Or-
 ganic Brain Syndromes or a progression from one Organic Brain Syndrome to
 another. For example, an individual may simultaneously have prominent delu-
 sions, hallucinations, and signs of disorientation, or may initially have a De-
 lirium, followed by an Organic Delusional Syndrome.

   Diagnostic criteria for Phencyclidine (PCP) or Similarly Acting Arylcyclo-
   hexylamine Mixed Organic Mental Disorder

   A. There is evidence of recent use of phencyclidine or a similarly acting
   arylcyclohexylamine.

   B. The resulting illness involves features of several Organic Brain Syn-
   dromes or a progression from one Organic Bram Syndrome to another,
   e.gv initially there is Delirium, followed by an Organic Delusional Syn-
  drome.


HALLUCINOGEN ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS
This group includes two types of substances, both of which have hallucinogenic
properties: substances structurally related to 5-hydroxytryptamine (e.g., lysergic
acid diethylamine [LSD] and dimethyltryptamine [DMT]), and substances re-
lated to catecholamine (e.g., mescaline).* These substances are taken orally.

305.30 Hallucinogen Hallucinosis
The essential features are characteristic perceptual changes, physical symptoms,
and maladaptive behavioral effects due to recent hallucinogen ingestion. The
perceptual changes include subjective intensification of perceptions, depersonal-
ization, derealization, illusions, hallucinations, or synesthesias (e.g., seeing colors
when a loud sound occurs). These occur in a state of full wakefulness and alert-
ness. There may be hyperacusis and overattention to detail. The illusions may

   * Phencyclidine (PCP), although it has been referred to as an hallucinogen, is classified separately
(p. 150) since it rarely causes a pure hallucinosis.


154 Diagnostic Categories

involve distortions of the individual's body image. The hallucinations are usually
visual, often of geometric forms and figures, sometimes of persons and objects.
More rarely, auditory and tactile hallucinations are experienced.
    Physical symptoms include pupillary dilation, tachycardia, sweating, pal-
pitations, blurring of vision, tremors, and incoordination.
    The maladaptive behavioral effects may take the form of marked anxiety or
depression, fear of losing one's mind, ideas of reference, paranoid ideation, im-
paired judgment, interference with social or occupational functioning, or failure
to meet responsibilities.
    This category is called an Hallucinosis even though it is recognized that fre-
quently, with low doses, the perceptual changes do not include hallucinations.

    Associated features. The associated features are heavily influenced by the
setting in which the syndrome occurs, the dose, and the expectations and per-
sonality of the individual. Euphoria is common. Usually the individual realizes
that the perceptual changes are due to the effect of the hallucinogen. More
rarely, the individual is convinced that he or she has lost his or her sanity and
will not regain it.
    Imagery and thoughts are often dominated by mystical or religious experi-
ences. For example, the individual may believe that he or she has achieved
certain insights not possible otherwise.

    Course. The onset is usually within an hour of ingestion. In the case of LSD,
the most commonly used hallucinogen, the disorder lasts about 6 hours. For
other hallucinogens the duration may range from under an hour to a day or two,
at most, three days.

    Complications. In rare cases the individual will act irrationally and may
harm himself or herself or others. "Flashback" hallucinations (recurrent hallu-
cinations after the hallucinogen is no longer present in the body) can occur.
Hallucinogen Delusional Disorder and Hallucinogen Affective Disorder are pos-
sible complications.

    Differential diagnosis. See Organic Hallucinosis, p. 116. Various Substance-
induced Intoxications, such as that due to cannabis, cause clinical pictures simi-
lar to the Hallucinogen Hallucinosis that results from low doses. In such cases,
if an adequate history is not available, laboratory tests should be used to make
the diagnosis.

  Diagnostic criteria for Hallucinogen Hallucinosis
  A. Recent ingestion of a hallucinogen,

  B. Perceptual changes occurring in a state of full wakefulness and alert-
  ness, e.gv subjective intensification of perceptions, depersonalization,
  dereaiization, illusions, hallucinations, synesthesias.


                                        Organic Mental Disorders 155

   C At least two of the foilowing physical symptoms:

       (1) pupillary dilation
       (2) tachycardia
       (3) sweating
       (4) palpitations
       (5) blurring of vision
       (6) tremors
       (7) ^coordination

   D. Maladaptive behavioral effects, e.g.,. marked anxiety or depression,
   ideas of reference, fear of losing one's mind, paranoid ideation, impaired
  judgment, interference with social or occupational functioning,

   E. Hot due to any other physical or mental disorder.

 292.11 Hallucinogen Delusional Disorder
The essential feature is an Organic Delusional Syndrome (p. 114) that persists
beyond the period of direct effect of the hallucinogen, i.e., 24 hours after cessa-
tion of hallucinogen use.
    The Organic Delusional Syndrome emerges during or following a Hallu-
cinogen Hallucinosis (p. 153). All of the perceptual changes described in Hallu-
cinogen Hallucinosis may occur; but, in addition, the individual has a delusional
conviction that the disturbed perceptions and thoughts correspond to reality.

    Course. The course is variable, and may range from a brief, transitory ex-
perience to a long-lasting, psychotic episode that is difficult to distinguish from
a nonorganic psychotic disorder, such as Schizophreniform Disorder or Acute
Paranoid Disorder.

    Complications. See Hallucinogen Hallucinosis, p. 154.

    Differential diagnosis. See Organic Delusional Syndrome, p. 114. A pre-
existing nonorganic psychotic disorder should be considered if a Hallucinogen
Delusional Disorder persists.

  Diagnostic criteria (or Hallucinogen Delusional Disorder
  A, Recent hallucinogen use.

  B, Development of an Organic Delusional Syndrome (p. 115} that persists
  beyond 24 hours after cessation of hallucinogen use.

  C, Not due to any other physical or mental disorder, such as Schizo-
  phrenia.


 156 Diagnostic Categories

 292.84 Hallucinogen Affective Disorder
The essential feature is an Organic Affective Syndrome (p. 117) that persists be-
yond the period of direct effect of the hallucinogen, i.e., 24 hours after cessa-
tion of hallucinogen use.
    Typically, the mood emerges shortly after hallucinogen use. Most com-
mon is the appearance of depression or anxiety; elation is rare. The depres-
sive features often include feelings of self-reproach or excessive or inappropri-
ate guilt, accompanied by fearfulness, tension, and physical restlessness. The in-
dividual may be unable to stop talking and have difficulty sleeping. Such indi-
viduals are frequently preoccupied with thoughts that they have destroyed their
brains, that they have driven themselves crazy and will be unable to return to
their normal state. These thoughts are without delusional conviction. When
there is elation, grandiosity, decreased need for sleep, distractibility, increased
activity, and loquacity are also present.

    Course. The course is variable, and may range from a brief, transitory ex-
perience to a long-lasting episode that is difficult to distinguish from an Affective
Disorder.

    Complications. Manic and major depressive episodes.

    Differential diagnosis. An individual with a preexisting Affective Disorder
may take an hallucinogen to elevate his or her mood and then become more de-
pressed. In such cases it may be difficult or impossible to determine if the in-
creased disturbance in mood is due to Hallucinogen Affective Disorder or is
merely an exacerbation of the Affective Disorder. See Organic Affective Syn-
drome, p. 117.
    Hallucinogen Delusional Disorder may also be accompanied by marked
affective changes. This diagnosis preempts a diagnosis of Hallucinogen Affective
Disorder.

  Diagnostic criteria for Hallucinogen Affective Disorder
  A, Recent use of a hallucinogen.

  B. Development of an Organic Affective Syndrome (p. 118} that persists
  beyond 24 hours after cessation of hallucinogen use.

  C. Absence of delusions.

  D, Not due to any other physical or mental disorder, such as pre-existing
  Affective Disorder.

CANNABIS ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS
This group includes all substances with psychoactive properties from the canna-
bis plant as well as chemically similar synthetic substances. In the United States


                                        Organic Mental Disorders 157

 the most commonly used substances are marijuana, hashish, and, occasionally,
 purified delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). These substances are smoked or
 taken orally in a number of forms, including mixed with food.

 305.20 Cannabis Intoxication
 The essential features are specific psychological and physical symptoms and mal-
 adaptive behavioral effects due to the recent use of cannabis.
    The psychological symptoms include euphoria, subjective intensification of
 perceptions, the sensation of slowed time (5 minutes may seem like an hour),
 preoccupation with auditory or visual stimuli, and apathy. The euphoria may
 be expressed as a marked sense of well-being and relaxation. The individual may
 be indifferent to his or her surroundings.
    Tachycardia is invariably present, although it is not as prominent when the
 individual is a chronic user of cannabis. Conjunctival injection is almost always
present. Other physical symptoms include increased appetite, often for "junk
 food," and a dry mouth.
    Maladaptive behavioral effects include paranoid ideation, panic attacks, and
 dysphoric affects. The individual may believe that he or she is dying or going
 crazy. (Some believe that adverse reactions are more likely to occur in individ-
 uals with rigid personalities, in individuals with a history of having had a psycho-
 tic disorder, or in circumstances considered to be threatening, such as the possi-
bility of a police raid.) Other maladaptive behavioral effects include impaired
judgment and interference with social or occupational functioning.

    Associated features. Depersonalization or derealization may occur. Hallu-
 cinations are rare except when very high blood levels are reached. (In such cir-
 cumstances, the substance acts as an hallucinogen. Because this rarely occurs, a
 separate diagnosis of Cannabis Hallucinosis is not included in this classification.)

    Course. Intoxication occurs almost immediately after smoking marijuana,
peaks within a half hour, and usually lasts about 3 hours. Orally ingested canna-
bis is more slowly absorbed and reaches a lower peak blood level, and the effects
last longer.

    Complications. Automobile accidents may occur because of impaired motor
coordination.

    Differential diagnosis. Other Substance-induced Intoxications should be
considered. The individual with Cannabis Intoxication will sometimes have the
 characteristic sweet smell of burned cannabis on his or her clothing. Alcohol In-
toxication frequently decreases appetite, increases aggressive behavior, produces
nystagmus or ataxia, and is associated with the smell of alcohol, whereas these
symptoms are rare in Cannabis Intoxication. Hallucinogens in low doses cause
a clinical picture that resembles Cannabis Intoxication. If the administration was
by smoking, this would indicate Cannabis Intoxication, since hallucinogens are
not smoked. If administration was by ingestion, Cannabis Intoxication still must
be considered.


 158 Diagnostic Categories

   Diagnostic criteria for Cannabis Intoxication
  A. Recent use of cannabis.

   B. Tachycardia.

  C At least one of the following psychological symptoms within 2 hours
  of use:

      {1} euphoria
      (2) subjective intensification of perceptions
      (3) sensation of slowed time
      (4) apathy

  D. At least one of the following physical symptoms within 2 hours of
  substance use:

      (1) conjunctival injection
      (2) increased appetite
      (3) dry mouth

  E. Maladaptive behavioral effects, e.g., excessive anxiety, suspiciousness
  or paranoid ideation, impaired judgment, interference with social or
  occupational functioning.

  F. Not due to any other physical or mental disorder.

292.11 Cannabis Delusional Disorder
The essential feature is an Organic Delusional Syndrome (p. 114), usually with
persecutory delusions, immediately following cannabis use or during the course
of Cannabis Intoxication.
    The existence of this category is controversial since the disturbance does not
persist beyond a few hours, the usual duration of Cannabis Intoxication.

    Associated features. Marked anxiety, emotional lability, depersonalization,
and subsequent amnesia for the episode can occur. Associated physical symp-
toms are the same as those seen in Cannabis Intoxication.

    Differential diagnosis. See Organic Delusional Syndrome, p. 114.

  Diagnostic criteria for Cannabis Delusional Disorder
  A, Recent use of cannafais.

  B. An Organic Delusional Syndrome (p. 115} within 2 hours of substance
  use.


                                    Organic Mental Disorders 159

  C The disturbance does not persist beyond 6 hours following cessation
  of substance use.

  D. Not due to any other physical or mental disorder.

TOBACCO ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDER
292.00 Tobacco Withdrawal
The essential feature is a characteristic withdrawal syndrome due to recent cessa-
tion of or reduction in tobacco use that has been at least moderate in duration
and amount. The syndrome includes craving for tobacco, irritability, anxiety,
difficulty concentrating, restlessness, headache, drowsiness, and gastrointestinal
disturbances. It is assumed that this syndrome is caused by nicotine withdrawal,
since nicotine is the major pharmacologically active ingredient in tobacco.
    Withdrawal does not occur with all smokers; but in many heavy cigarette
smokers, changes in mood and performance that are probably related to with-
drawal can be detected within 2 hours after the last cigarette. The sense of crav-
ing appears to reach a peak within the first 24 hours after the last cigarette,
thereafter gradually declining over a few days to several weeks. In any given
case it is difficult to distinguish between a withdrawal effect and the emergence
of psychological traits that were suppressed, controlled, or altered by the effects
of nicotine.

    Associated features. Increased slow rhythms on the EEC, increased fre-
quency of masseter muscle contractions, decreased heart rate and blood pressure,
weight gain, and impairment in performance of tasks requiring vigilance are
common associated features of Tobacco Withdrawal.

    Course. The symptoms begin within 24 hours of cessation of or reduction
in tobacco use and decrease in intensity over a period of a few days to several
weeks.

   Differential diagnosis. The diagnosis of Tobacco Withdrawal is usually self-
evident from the individual's history, and the disappearance of symptoms if
smoking is resumed is confirmatory.

  Diagnostic criteria for Tobacco Withdrawal
  A, Use of tobacco for at least several weeks at a level equivalent to more
  than ten cigarettes per day, with each cigarette containing at least 0.5 mg
  of nicotine.

  8. Abrupt cessation of or reduction in tobacco use, followed within 24
  hours by at least four of the following;


 160 Diagnostic Categories

      (1) craving for tobacco
      (2) irritability
      (3) anxiety
      (4) difficulty concentrating
      (5) restlessness
      (6) headache
      (7) drowsiness
      (8) gastrointestinal disturbances

CAFFEINE ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDER
The consumption of caffeine, especially in the form of coffee, tea, cola, chocolate,
and cocoa, is ubiquitous in the United States. Other common sources of caffeine
are over-the-counter analgesics, "cold" preparations, and stimulants.

305.90 Caffeine Intoxication
The essential features are such characteristic effects of the recent use of caffeine-
containing substances as restlessness, nervousness, excitement, insomnia, flushed
face, diuresis, and gastrointestinal complaints. These symptoms appear in some
individuals following ingestion of as little as 250 mg of caffeine per day, whereas
others require much larger doses. At levels of more than I g/day there may be
muscle twitchings, periods of inexhaustibility, psychomotor agitation, rambling
flow of thought and speech, and cardiac arrhythmia. Mild sensory disturbances
such as ringing in the ears and flashes of light have been reported at higher
doses. With doses exceeding 10 g of caffeine, grand mal seizures and respiratory
failure may result in death.
    This disorder has been called Caffeinism.
    A rough guide to calculating caffeine intake follows: coffee contains 100-
150 mg of caffeine per cup; tea is about half as strong; a glass of cola is about
a third as strong. Most caffeine-containing prescriptions and over-the-counter
medications are one-third to one-half the strength of a cup of coffee. Two
notable exceptions are migraine medications and over-the-counter stimulants
that contain 100 mg per tablet.

    Complications. Complications include developing or aggravating gastro-
intestinal and heart disease. Caffeine can produce epigastric distress and, occa-
sionally, peptic ulcer and hematemesis. In addition to arrhythmia with extremely
high dosages, the substance can cause marked hypotension and circulatory
failure.

    Differential diagnosis. Manic episodes, Panic Disorder or Generalized
Anxiety Disorder can cause a clinical picture similar to that of Caffeine Intoxi-
cation. The temporal relationship of the symptoms to caffeine use establishes
the diagnosis.


                                         Organic Mental Disorders 161

   Diagnostic criteria for Caffeine Intoxication
   A. Recent consumption of caffeine, usually in excess of 250 mg.

   B. At least five of the following:

       (1)- restlessness
       (2) nervousness
       (3) excitement
       (4) insomnia
       (5) flushed face
       (6) diuresis
       (7) gastrointestinal complaints
       (8) muscle twitching
       (9) rambling flow of thought and speech
      (10) cardiac arrhythmia
      (11) periods of inexhaustibility
      (12) psychomotor agitation

   C. Not due to any other mental disorder, such as an Anxiety Disorder.


 OTHER OR UNSPECIFIED SUBSTANCE-INDUCED ORGANIC MENTAL
 DISORDERS
 This section is to be used when an individual develops an Organic Brain Syn-
 drome apparently due to use of a substance if:
     (1) the substance cannot be classified in any of the ten previously listed
     categories (examples: Levo-dopa Delusional Disorder, Anticholinergic De-
     lirium) ; or
     (2) the syndrome is caused by an unknown substance (example: an Intoxi-
     cation after taking a bottle of unlabeled pills).
     Following the listing of each of the diagnoses in this section, the reader is
 directed to the page listing the diagnostic criteria for the various Organic Brain
 Syndromes.

305.90 Other or Unspecified Substance Intoxication (p. 120)

 292.00 Other or Unspecified Substance Withdrawal (p. 122)

292.81 Other or Unspecified Substance Delirium (p. 104)

292.82 Other or Unspecified Substance Dementia (p. 107)

292.83 Other or Unspecified Substance Amnestic Disorder (p. 112)

292.11 Other or Unspecified Substance Delusional Disorder (p. 114)


162 Diagnostic Categories

292.12 Other or Unspecified Substance Hallucinosis (p. 115)

292.84 Other or Unspecified Substance Affective Disorder (p. 117)

292.89 Other or Unspecified Substance Personality Disorder (p. 118)

292.90 Other or Unspecified Substance Atypical or Mixed Organic
        Mental Disorder (p. 123)

            ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS—SECTION 2

Organic Mental Disorders in which the etiology or pathophysiological process
is either noted on Axis III as an additional diagnosis from outside of the mental
disorders section of ICD-9-CM or is unknown.
This section permits the identification of specific Organic Brain Syndromes on
Axis I, associated with physical disorders noted on Axis III. Examples would
include Delirium (Axis I) associated with pneumonia (Axis III) and Dementia
(Axis I) associated with brain tumor (Axis III). Following the name of each of
the Organic Brain Syndromes is the page listing the diagnostic criteria for the
syndrome.

293.00 Delirium (p. 107)

294.10 Dementia (p. Ill)

294.00 Amnestic Syndrome (p. 113)

293.81 Organic Delusional Syndrome (p. 115)

293.82 Organic Hallucinosis (p. 116)

293.83 Organic Affective Syndrome (p. 118)

310.10 Organic Personality Syndrome (p. 119)

294.80 Atypical or Mixed Organic Brain Syndrome (p. 123)


                   Substance Use Disorders


In our society, use of certain substances to modify mood or behavior under
certain circumstances is generally regarded as normal and appropriate. Such
use includes recreational drinking of alcohol, in which a majority of adult
Americans participate, and the use of caffeine as a stimulant in the form of
coffee. On the other hand, there are wide subcultural variations. In some groups
even the recreational use of alcohol is frowned upon, while in other groups the
use of various illegal substances for recreational purposes is widely accepted. In
addition, certain substances are used medically for the alleviation of pain, relief
of tension, or to suppress appetite.
    This diagnostic class deals with behavioral changes associated with more or
less regular use of substances that affect the central nervous system. These
behavioral changes in almost all subcultures would be viewed as extremely
undesirable. Examples of such behavioral changes include impairment in social
or occupational functioning as a consequence of substance use, inability to
control use of or to stop taking the substance, and the development of serious
withdrawal symptoms after cessation of or reduction in substance use. These
conditions are here conceptualized as mental disorders and are therefore to be
distinguished from nonpathological substance use for recreational or medical
purposes.
    The disorders classified in this section are to be distinguished from the
corresponding portions of the Organic Mental Disorders section. Whereas the
Substance Use Disorders refer to the maladaptive behavior associated with
more or less regular use of the substances, the Substance-induced Organic
Mental Disorders describe the direct acute or chronic effects of these substances
on the central nervous system. Almost invariably, individuals who have a
Substance Use Disorder will also at various times have a Substance-induced
Organic Mental Disorder, such as an Intoxication or Withdrawal.
    For most classes of substances, pathological use is divided into Substance
Abuse and Substance Dependence, defined below:

SUBSTANCE ABUSE SUBSTANCE DEPENDENCE
Pattern of pathological use Tolerance or withdrawal
Impairment in social or occupational (For Alcohol Dependence and Can-
  functioning due to substance use nabis Dependence a pattern of
                                      pathological use or impairment in
Minimal duration of disturbance of social or occupational functioning
  at least one month is also required. For the exception
                                      of Tobacco Dependence, see p.
                                      176.)

                                163


164 Diagnostic Categories

SUBSTANCE ABUSE
Three criteria distinguish nonpathological substance use from Substance
Abuse.

    A pattern of pathological use. Depending upon the substance, this may be
manifested by: intoxication throughout the day, inability to cut down or stop
use, repeated efforts to control use through periods of temporary abstinence or
restriction of use to certain times of the day, continuation of substance use
despite a serious physical disorder that the individual knows is exacerbated by
use of the substance, need for daily use of the substance for adequate function-
ing, and episodes of a complication of the substance intoxication (e.g., alcoholic
blackouts, opioid overdose).

    Impairment in social or occupational functioning caused by the pattern of
pathological use. Social relations can be disturbed by the individual's failure
to meet important obligations to friends and family, by display of erratic and
impulsive behavior, and by inappropriate expression of aggressive feelings. The
individual may have legal difficulties because of complications of the intoxicated
state (e.g., car accidents) or because of criminal behavior to obtain money to
purchase the substance. (However, legal difficulties due to possession, purchase,
or sale of illegal substances are highly dependent on local customs and laws,
and change over time. For this reason, such legal difficulty on a single occa-
 sion should not be considered in the evaluation of impairment in social func-
tioning for diagnostic purposes.)
    Occupational functioning can deteriorate if the individual misses work or
 school, or is unable to function effectively because of being intoxicated. When
 impairment is severe, the individual's life can become totally dominated by use
 of the substance, with marked deterioration in physical and psychological func-
 tioning. Incapacitation is more frequently associated with chronic Opioid and
 Alcohol Dependence than with dependence on other substances.
    Frequently individuals who develop Substance Use Disorders also have
 preexisting Personality Disorders and Affective Disorders with concomitant
 impairment in social and occupational functioning. It is therefore necessary to
 determine that the social or occupational impairment associated with the diag-
 nosis of Substance Abuse or Dependence is actually due to the use of the
 substance. The best clue is a change in functioning that accompanies the onset
 of a pathological pattern of substance use, or the development of physiological
 dependence.

     Duration. Abuse as used in this manual requires that the disturbance last
 at least one month. Signs of the disturbance need not be present continuously
 throughout the month, but should be sufficiently frequent for a pattern of
 pathological use causing interference with social or occupational functioning to
 be apparent. For example, several episodes of binge drinking causing family
 arguments during a one-month period would be sufficient even though between
 binges the individual's functioning was apparently not impaired.


                                        Substance Use Disorders 165

    Isolated instances of pathological use of a substance can be adequately
diagnosed by noting the specific Organic Brain Syndromes that were associated
with this use. For example, a history of one or more instances of maladaptive
use of alcohol over a three-week period may be noted as prior episodes of
Alcohol Intoxication.

SUBSTANCE DEPENDENCE
Substance Dependence generally is a more severe form of Substance Use
Disorder than Substance Abuse and requires physiological dependence, evi-
denced by either tolerance or withdrawal. Almost invariably there is also a
pattern of pathological use that causes impairment in social or occupational func-
tioning, although in rare cases the manifestations of the disorder are limited
to physiological dependence. An example would be an individual's inadvertently
becoming physiologically dependent on an analgesic opioid given to him by a
physician for the relief of physical pain.
    The diagnosis of all of the Substance Dependence categories requires only
evidence of tolerance or withdrawal, except for Alcohol and Cannabis Depen-
dence, which in addition require evidence of social or occupational impairment
from use of the substance or a pattern of pathological substance use.

    Tolerance. Tolerance means that markedly increased amounts of the sub-
stance are required to achieve the desired effect or there is a markedly dimin-
ished effect with regular use of the same dose. When the substance used is
illegal and mixed with various diluents or with other substances, tolerance may
be difficult to determine. In the case of alcohol, it should be noted that there are
wide individual variations in the capacity to drink large quantities of alcohol
without intoxication. Since some persons have the capacity to drink large amounts
despite limited drinking experience, the distinguished feature of tolerance is
that the individual reports that the amount of alcohol he or she can drink before
showing signs of intoxication has increased markedly over time.

    Withdrawal. In withdrawal, a substance-specific syndrome follows cessa-
tion of or reduction in intake of a substance that was previously regularly used
by the individual to induce a physiological state of intoxication. See Withdrawal
as an Organic Brain Syndrome, p. 122.
    Many heavy coffee drinkers are physiologically dependent on caffeine and
exhibit both tolerance and withdrawal. However, since such use generally does
not cause distress or social or occupational impairment, and since few if any
of these individuals have difficulty switching to decaffeinated coffee or coffee
substitutes, the condition does not appear to be of clinical significance. Therefore,
caffeine dependence is not included in this classification of mental disorders.
In contrast, Caffeine Intoxication is often clinically significant, and therefore is
included (p. 160).

CLASSES OF SUBSTANCES
Five classes of substances are associated with both abuse and dependence:
alcohol, barbiturates or similarly acting sedatives or hypnotics, opioids, ampheta-


166 Diagnostic Categories

mines or similarly acting sympathomimetics, and cannabis. Some of these sub-
stances are used medically, such as the amphetamines, barbiturates, and opioids.
Three classes of substances are associated only with abuse because physio-
logical dependence has not been demonstrated: cocaine, phencyclidine (PCP) or
similarly acting arylcyclohexylamines, and hallucinogens. Finally, one substance,
tobacco, is associated only with dependence, since heavy use of tobacco itself
is not associated with impairment in social or occupational functioning (though
the reaction of others to the tobacco use may cause difficulties).

USE OF MULTIPLE SUBSTANCES
Substance Abuse and Dependence frequently involve several substances.
Individuals with Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hypnotic Abuse or
Dependence often may also have problems with alcohol or, more rarely, use
amphetamine to counter sedative effects. Individuals with Opioid or Cannabis
Abuse or Dependence usually have several other Substance Use Disorders, par-
ticularly of barbiturates or similarly acting sedatives and hypnotics, ampheta-
mines or similarly acting sympathomimetics, and cocaine.
    When an individual's condition meets the criteria for more than one Sub-
stance Use Disorder, multiple diagnoses should generally be made. (The excep-
tion to this is when the abuse or dependence involves so many substances that
the clinician prefers to indicate a combination of substances rather than list each
specific substance. See p. 179.)

RECORDING SPECIFIC DIAGNOSES
The clinician should record the name of the specific substance rather than
of the entire class of substances, using the code number for the appropriate class.
Examples: The clinician should write 305.73 Amphetamine Abuse, In Remis-
sion (rather than Amphetamine or Similarly Acting Sympathomimetic Abuse);
304.11 Valium Dependence, Continuous (rather than Barbiturate or Similarly
Acting Sedative or Hypnotic Dependence); 305.91 Compazine Abuse, Continu-
ous (rather than Other, Mixed, or Unspecified Substance Abuse).

SUBCLASSIFICATION OF COURSE
No entirely adequate method for subtyping the course of these disorders
is available. However, the following guidelines should be used to indicate the
course of the illness in the fifth digit:

   Code Course Definition
    1 Continuous More or less regular maladaptive use for over six
                         months.
    2 Episodic A fairly circumscribed period of maladaptive use,
                         with one or more similar periods in the past.
    3 In remission Previous maladaptive use, but not using substance
                         at present. The differentiation of this from no
                         longer ill and from the other course categories re-
                         quires consideration of the period of time since the
                         last period of disturbance, the total duration of the


                                        Substance Use Disorders 167

  Code Course Definition
                        disturbance, and the need for continued evaluation
                        or prophylactic treatment.
    0 Unspecified Course unknown or first signs of illness with
                        course uncertain.

OTHER FEATURES OF SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS
    Associated features. Personality disturbance and disturbance of mood are
often present, and may be intensified by the Substance Use Disorder. For ex-
ample, antisocial personality traits may be accentuated by the need to obtain
money to purchase illegal substances. Anxiety or depression associated with
Borderline Personality Disorder may be intensified as the individual uses a sub-
stance in an unsuccessful attempt to treat his or her mood disturbance.
    Abuse of certain substances, particularly cocaine, hallucinogens, or can-
nabis, may be associated with identification with countercultural life-styles or,
more rarely, identification with non-traditional religious or mystical ideas.
    In chronic Abuse and Dependence, mood lability and suspiciousness, both
of which can contribute to violent behavior, are common.

    Age at onset. Alcohol Abuse and Dependence usually appear in the 20s,
30s, and 40s. Opioid, Cocaine, Amphetamine or Similarly Acting Sympathomi-
metic, Hallucinogen, Cannabis, Cocaine, Phencyclidine (PCP) or Similarly Act-
ing Arylcyclohexylamine, and Tobacco Use Disorders more commonly begin
in the late teens and 20s. Two patterns of onset for Barbiturate or Similarly
Acting Sedative or Hypnotic Abuse and Dependence have been identified (p.
171). When a Substance Use Disorder begins early in life, it is often associated
with failure to complete school and a lifelong pattern of low occupational
achievement.

    Complications. The abuse or dependence associated with each class of
substance may cause an Organic Brain Syndrome. For example, prolonged
Alcohol Dependence may cause Alcohol Withdrawal Delirium, Alcohol Amnestic
Disorder, or Alcohol Hallucinosis. Similarly, Hallucinogen Delusional Disorder
may be a complication of chronic hallucinogen use. Complications of the specific
intoxication states, such as traffic accidents and physical injury due to Alcohol
Intoxication, have been noted in the Organic Mental Disorders section.
    Frequently there is a deterioration in the general level of physical health.
Malnutrition and a variety of other physical disorders may result from failure
to maintain physical health by proper diet and adequate personal hygiene.
    Use of contaminated needles for the intravenous administration of opioids,
cocaine, and amphetamines can cause hepatitis, tetanus, vasculitis, septicemia,
subacute bacterial endocarditis, embolic phenomena, or malaria. Materials used
to "cut" the substances can cause toxic or allergic reactions. Use of cocaine by
means of the intranasal route ("snorting") sometimes results in erosion of the
nasal septum.


168 Diagnostic Categories

    Physical complications of chronic Alcohol Dependence include hepatitis,
cirrhosis, peripheral neuropathy, and gastritis. In addition, chronic Alcohol
Dependence increases the risk and seriousness of heart disease, pneumonia,
tuberculosis, and neurological disorders. The long-term potential for respiratory
disorder in chronic cannabis use is controversial. The long-term physical com-
plications of chronic and heavy tobacco use are discussed on p. 177.
    Depressive symptoms are a frequent complication of Substance Use Dis-
orders, and partly account for the high rate of suicide by individuals with
Substance Dependence. Suicide associated with alcohol and other substances can
occur in both intoxicated and sober states.

    Predisposing factors. Personality Disorders, particularly Antisocial Per-
sonality Disorder, predispose to the development of Substance Use Disorders.

    Prevalence. Most of the Substance Use Disorders are common, especially
those associated with alcohol and tobacco. Others, such as Opioid Abuse, are
rare. For example, about 16% of the American public report some problem asso-
ciated with alcohol within the past three years, and about 4% report more
than trivial problems. In some economically deprived urban communities, Opioid
Abuse and Dependence are widespread.

    Sex ratio. Subtance Use Disorders are diagnosed more commonly in men
than in women.

    Differential diagnosis. Nonpathological substance use for recreational or
medical purposes is not associated with impairment in social or occupational
 functioning or a pathological pattern of use.
    Repeated episodes of substance-induced intoxication are almost invariably
 present in Substance Abuse or Dependence, although for some substances it
is possible to develop dependence without ever exhibiting frank intoxication
 (e.g., alcohol). Furthermore, substance-induced intoxication as an isolated epi-
 sode not involving either abuse or dependence is common.
    There are now methods to detect the presence of alcohol, barbiturates and
 similarly acting sedatives and hypnotics, opioids, cocaine, and amphetamines in
 serum or urine. In some cases the tests indicate that an individual who thinks
 he or she has been using one substance, such as cocaine, has in fact been taking
 something else, such as amphetamine crystals.
     A test dose may be used to establish tolerance to barbiturates by adminis-
 tering 200 mg of a short-acting barbiturate (usually pentobarbital) hourly until
 early signs of intoxication appear. The total amount of barbiturate required to
 produce these signs of intoxication is multiplied by a factor of three, giving an
 approximation of the individual's daily tolerance level to barbiturates.
    When Opioid Dependence is suspected, signs and symptoms of Opioid
 Withdrawal may be precipitated by the subcutaneous administration of 0.4 mg
 of naloxone, an opioid antagonist. (This should not be administered to indi-
 viduals with a history of cardiac disease or coronary insufficiency.)


                                    Substance Use Disorders 169

 305.0x Alcohol Abuse

 303.9x Alcohol Dependence
 For a description of Alcohol Intoxication, Alcohol Withdrawal, and the
 other Alcohol Organic Mental Disorders, see Alcohol-induced Organic Mental
Disorders, p. 129.
    The essential feature of Alcohol Abuse is a pattern of pathological use for
at least a month that causes impairment in social or occupational functioning.
    The essential features of Alcohol Dependence are either a pattern of patho-
logical alcohol use or impairment in social or occupational functioning due to
alcohol, and either tolerance or withdrawal. Alcohol Dependence has also been
called Alcoholism.

    Course. When abuse or dependence develops, it is usually within the
first five years after regular drinking is established. Heavy drinking in adoles-
cence (before age 16) is particularly likely to be associated with later problems.
    Although Alcohol Dependence and Abuse can continue into old age, they
may remit with aging, sometimes in response to the development of physical
complications. Occasional drinking with rare or no episodes of intoxication does
occur in some persons with a clear prior history of Alcohol Dependence. There-
fore, drinking that is currently moderate should not be considered evidence for
the absence of Alcohol Dependence in the past.
    There are three main patterns of chronic pathological alcohol use. The
first is regular daily intake of large amounts; the second is regular heavy drink-
ing limited to weekends. These two patterns are included in the fifth-digit sub-
type "Continuous." The third pattern is long periods of sobriety interspersed
with binges of daily heavy drinking lasting for weeks or months. This pattern
corresponds to the fifth-digit subtype "Episodic/7

    Familial pattern. Alcohol Abuse and Dependence are more common among
family members than in the general population. Evidence of a genetic factor is
the increased prevalence of Alcohol Dependence in the early-adopted offspring
of parents with the disorder.

  Diagnostic criteria lor Alcohol Abuse
  A, Pattern of pathological alcohol use: need for daily USB of alcohol for
  adequate functioning; inability to cut down or stop drinking; repeated
  efforts to control or reduce excess drinking by "going on the wagon"
  (periods of temporary abstinence) or restricting drinking to certaijn times
  of the day; binges (remaining intoxicated throughout the day for at least
  two days); occasional consumption of a fifth of spirits (or its equivalent
  In wine or beer); amnesic periods for events occurring while intoxicM«d
  (blackouts); continuation of drinking despite a serious physical disorder
  that the individual knows is exacerbated by alcohol use; drinking of non-
  beverage alcohol.


 170 Diagnostic Categories

  B. Impairment in social or occupational functioning due to alcohol use:
  e.g., violence while intoxicated, absence from work, loss of job, legal
  difficulties (e.g., arrest for intoxicated behavior, traffic accidents while
  intoxicated), arguments or difficulties with family or friends because of
  excessive alcohol use,
  C. Duration of disturbance of at least one month.

  Diagnostic criteria for Alcohol Dependence
  A, Either a pattern of pathological alcohol use or impairment in social
  or occupational functioning due to alcohol use:
  Pattern of pathological alcohol use: need for daily use of alcohol for
  adequate functioning; inability to cut down or stop drinking; repeated
  efforts to control or reduce excess drinking by "going on the wagon"
  (periods of temporary abstinence) or restricting drinking to certain times
  of the day; binges (remaining intoxicated throughout the day for at least
  two days); occasional consumption of a fifth of spirits (or its equivalent
  in .wine or beer); amnesic periods for events occurring while intoxicated
  (blackouts); continuation of drinking despite a serious physical disorder
  that the individual knows is exacerbated by alcohol use; drinking of non-
  beverage alcohol.
  Impairment in social or occupational functioning due to alcohol use:
  eg., violence while intoxicated, absence from work, loss of job, legal
  difficulties (e.g., arrest for intoxicated behavior, traffic accidents while
  intoxicated), arguments or difficulties with family or friends because of
  excessive alcohol use.
  B, Either tolerance or withdrawal:
     Tolerance: need for markedly increased amounts of alcohol to
     achieve the desired effect, or markedly diminished effect with regu-
     lar use of the same amount,
     Withdrawal: development of Alcohol Withdrawal (e.g., morning
     "shakes" and malaise relieved by drinking) after cessation of or re-
     duction in drinking (p, 133).

305.4x Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hypnotic Abuse

304.1x Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hypnotic Dependence
See Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hypnotic Organic Mental
Disorders (p. 139) for a discussion of the substances included in this class,
usual routes of administration, and a description of Barbiturate or Similarly
Acting Sedative or Hypnotic Intoxication, Withdrawal, and Amnestic Disorder.
   The essential feature of Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hyp-
notic Abuse is a pattern of pathological use for at least one month that


                                        Substance Use Disorders 171

 causes impairment in social or occupational functioning. The essential feature of
 Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hypnotic Dependence is either toler-
 ance or withdrawal.
    There are two patterns of development of dependence and abuse. In one,
 the individual has originally obtained the substance by prescription from a
physician for insomnia, but has gradually increased the dose and frequency
 of use on his or her own. At first this increase is intended for sleep, but the
individual then discovers that adjusted doses of the substance during the day
seem to help in coping with daily living problems through relief of tension and
 anxiety. Individuals with this pattern are more apt to be from a middle-class
background, between ages 30-60, and female. The other pattern involves indi-
viduals who are apt to be males in their teens or early 20s who, with a group
of peers, use substances obtained from illegal sources. The initial objective is to
attain a "high" or euphoria, or to counteract the stimulant effects of ampheta-
mines.

    Course. The most common course is heavy daily use that results in depen-
dence. A significant number of individuals with dependence eventually stop using
the substance, and demonstrate a permanent recovery, even from the physical
complications of the disorder.


  Diagnostic criteria for Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hypnotic
  Abuse
  A. Pattern of pathological use: inability to cut down or stop use; intoxi-
  cation throughout the day; frequent use of the equivalent of 60f m§ or
  more of secobarbital or 60 mg Or more of diazepam; amnesic periods for
  events that occurred white intoxicated.

  B. Impairrnentm social or occupational functioning due to substance me:
  e.g,, fights, loss of friends, absence ;frOm work, Joss of job, or legal difi-
  culties (other than a single arrest due to possession, purchase, or sale of
  the substance).

  C. Duration of disturbance of at least one month.

  Diagnostic criteria for Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative or Hypnotic
  Dependence
  Either tolerance or withdrawal:
      Tolerance; need for markedly increased amounts Of the substance
      to achieve the desired effect, or markedly diminished effect with
      regular use of the same amount.
      Withdrawal: development of Barbiturate or Similarly Acting Sedative
      or Hypnotic Withdrawal (p. 140) after cessation of or redaction in
      substance use.


 172 Diagnostic Categories

 305.5x Opioid Abuse
 304. Ox Opioid Dependence
 See Opioid Organic Mental Disorders (p. 142) for a discussion of the sub-
 stances included in this class, usual routes of administration, and a description
 of Opioid Intoxication and Withdrawal.
     The essential feature of Opioid Abuse is a pattern of pathological use for
 at least one month that causes impairment in social or occupational functioning.
     The essential feature of Opioid Dependence is either tolerance or with-
 drawal.

     Course. Opioid Abuse and Dependence are generally preceded by a period
 of "polydrug use/' which may involve tobacco, alcohol, marijuana, sedative-
 hypnotics, prescription and nonprescription cough syrups, hallucinogens, or
 amphetamines. The use of these other substances usually continues after the
 use of opioids is established. Once a pattern of Opioid Dependence is estab-
 lished, substance procurement and use usually dominates the individual's life.
    Approximately half of the individuals who engage in Opioid Abuse go
on to develop Opioid Dependence. Once Opioid Dependence is established,
 the course is a function of the context of the addiction. For example, the vast
majority of persons who became dependent on heroin in Vietnam did not
return to their addiction when back in the United States. In contrast, it is
believed that most individuals who become dependent on opioids in the United
States become involved in a chronic behavioral disorder, marked by remissions
while in treatment or prison or when the substance is scarce and relapses on
returning to a familiar environment where these substances are available and
friends or colleagues use these substances. In the United States, in this century,
persons with Opioid Dependence have a high annual death rate (approximately
10 per 1,000) because of the physical complications of the disorder and a life-
style often associated with violence. Among those who survive, increased absti-
nence is found with the passage of years, with final cessation of dependence an
average of about nine years after its onset.

  Diagnostic criteria for Opioid Abuse
  A. Pattern of pathological use; inability to reduce pt stop use; intoxication
  throughout the day; use of opioids nearly every day for at least a month;
  episodes of opioid overdose (intoxication so severe tbfet respiration and
  consciousness are impaired).
  B, Impairment In social or Bcmp^ormf fm<^tonmg cfue;to oplo/d use;
  e.gv fights, bssr of friends, afeenceilromwor^:|oss^i job, or legal
  difficulties (other than due to a sjragfe jarrest for possfeslion, purchase^ or
  sale of the substance). -• •''. ."; , ,::V ,'/"" •-•_""; '__•""
  C. Duration of disturbmceJoi at least- ohe 'month**'

  Diagnostic criteria for Opioid Dependence
  Either tolerance or withdrawal:


                                    Substance Use Disorders 173

     To/erance; need for markedly increased amounts of opioid to achieve
      the desired effect, or markedly diminished effect with regular use
     ol the same amount
     Withdrawal: development of Qptoid Withdrawal (p. 144) after
     cessation of or reduction in siibstance use.

305.6x Cocaine Abuse
See Cocaine Organic Mental Disorders (p. 145) for a discussion of the usual
routes of administration and a description of Cocaine Intoxication. Since only
transitory withdrawal symptoms occur after cessation of or reduction in pro-
longed use, a separate category of dependence on cocaine is not included.
    The essential feature of Cocaine Abuse is a pathological pattern of use for
at least one month that causes impairment in social or occupational functioning.

    Course. The development of Cocaine Abuse may take two to eight months
of cocaine use. Paranoid ideation, suspiciousness, and ritualistic behavior gen-
erally occur late in the course of abuse. Although habitual use has lasted 10 to 15
years in some persons, Cocaine Abuse does not have as prolonged a course as
is usually the case with Barbiturate and Opioid Abuse.

  Diagnostic criteria for Cocaine Abuse
  A. Pattern of pathological tise: ifiakrtUty to reduce or stop use; intoxica-
  tion throughout the day; episodes of cocaine overdose (intoxication so
  severe that hallucinations and delusions occur in a clear sensorium).

  B. Impairment in socfa/ or occupational functioning due to cocaine use;
  e.g., fights, loss of friends, absence from work, loss of job, or legal diffi-
  culties (other than due to a single arrest for possession, purchase, or sale
  of the substance)»

  C Duration of disturbance of at least one month.

305.7x Amphetamine or Similarly Acting Sympathomimetic Abuse

304.4x Amphetamine or Similarly Acting Sympathomimetic Dependence
See Amphetamine or Similarly Acting Sympathomimetic Organic Mental
Disorders (p. 147) for a discussion of the substances included in this class, usual
routes of administration, and a description of Amphetamine or Similarly Acting
Sympathomimetic Intoxication, Delirium, Delusional Disorder, and Withdrawal.
    The essential feature of Amphetamine or Similarly Acting Sympathomimetic
Abuse is a pattern of pathological use for at least a month that causes impair-
ment in social or occupational functioning. The usual pattern is "runs" of daily
use for 10 to 14 days at a time. The essential feature of Amphetamine or Simi-
larly Acting Sympathomimetic Dependence is either tolerance or withdrawal.


 174 Diagnostic Categories

     Course. See Cocaine Abuse, p. 173.

   Diagnostic criteria for Amphetamine or Similarly Acting Sympathomimetic
   Abuse
  A, Pattern of pathological use: inability to reduce or stop use; intoxica-
   tion throughout the day; use of substance nearly every day for at least
   one month; episodes of either Amphetamine or Similarly Acting Sym-
  pathomimetic Delusional Disorder or Amphetamine or Similarly Acting
  Sympathomimetic Delirium.

  B. Impairment in social or occupational functioning due to amphetamine
  or similarly acting Sympathomimetic use: e,g., fights, loss of friends,
  absence from work, loss of Job, or legal difficulties (other than due to
  a single arrest for possession, purchase, or sale of the substance).

  C Duration of disturbance of at least one month.

  Diagnostic criteria for Amphetamine or Similarly Acting Sympathomimetic
  Dependence
  Either tolerance or withdrawal:
      Tolerance: need for markedly increased amounts of substance to
      achieve the desired effect, or markedly diminished effect with regu-
      lar use of the same amount
      Withdrawal; development of Amphetamine or Similarly Acting Sym-
      pathomimetic Withdrawal (p. 150) after cessation of or reduction in
      substance use.

305.9x Phencyclidine (PCP) or Similarly Acting Arylcyclohexylamine Abuse
See Phencyclidine or Similarly Acting Arylcyclohexylamine Organic Mental
Disorders (p. 150) for a discussion of the substances included in this class, usual
routes of administration, and a description of Phencyclidine (PCP) or Similarly
Acting Arylcyclohexylamine Intoxication, Delirium, and Mixed Organic Mental
Disorder.
    The essential feature of Phencyclidine or Similarly Acting Arylcyclo-
hexylamine Abuse is a pattern of pathological use for at least a month that
causes impairment in social or occupational functioning.
    Because no clear withdrawal syndrome or tolerance to this substance has
been produced experimentally or observed clinically, a category for dependence
is not included.

    Course. See Cocaine Abuse, p. 173.

  Diagnostic criteria for Phencyclidine (PCP) or Similarly Acting Aryicyclo-
  hexylamine Abuse
  A. .Pattern, of pathological use: intoxication throughout the day; episodes


                                        Substance Use Disorders 175

   of Phencyclidine or Similarly Acting Arylcyclohexylamine Delirium or
   Mixed Organic Mental Disorder,

   B. Impairment in social or occupational functioning due to substance
   use: e,g,, fights, loss of friends, absence from work, loss of job, or legal
   difficulties (other than due to a single arrest for possession, purchase, or
   sale of the substance).

   C. Duration of disturbance of at least one month.

 305.3x Hallucinogen Abuse
See Hallucinogen Organic Mental Disorders (p. 153) for a discussion of the
 substances included in this class, usual route of administration, and a description
 of Hallucinogen Intoxication, Delusional Disorder, and Affective Disorder.
    The essential feature of Hallucinogen Abuse is a pattern of pathological use
 for at least one month that causes impairment in social or occupational func-
 tioning.
    Because no clear withdrawal syndrome has been produced experimentally
 or observed clinically, a category for dependence is not included.

    Course. The course is unpredictable and is probably related to the nature of
 the underlying pathology that played a role in the onset of use. Most individuals
rapidly resume their former life-style after only a brief period of abuse.

   Diagnostic criteria lor Hallucinogen Abuse
  A. Pattern of pathological use: Inability to reduce or stop use; intoxica-
  tion throughout the day (possible only with some hallucinogens); episodes
  of Hallucinogen Delusional Disorder or Hallucinogen Affective Disorder.

  B. Impairment in social or occupational functioning due to hallucinogen
  use: e.g., fights, loss of friends, absence from work, loss of job, or legal
  difficulties (other than due to a single arrest for possession, purchase, or
  sale of the illegal substance).

  C. Duration of disturbance of at least one month.

305.2x Cannabis Abuse

304.3x Cannabis Dependence
See Cannabis Organic Mental Disorders (p. 156) for a discussion of the
substances included in this class, usual routes of administration, and a descrip-
tion of Cannabis Intoxication and Delusional Disorder.
    The essential feature of Cannabis Abuse is a pattern of pathological use


 176 Diagnostic Categories

 for at least a month that causes impairment in social or occupational functioning.
 The essential features of Cannabis Dependence are impairment in social or oc-
 cupational functioning due to cannabis use, and tolerance (withdrawal has not
 been conclusively demonstrated). The existence and significance of tolerance
 (Cannabis Dependence) with regular heavy use of cannabis are controversial.

    Course. Many users stop or decrease their use of cannabis spontaneously
 or when impairment in functioning develops.

   Diagnostic criteria for Cannabis Abuse
  A. Pattern of pathological use: intoxication throughout the day; use of
  cannabis nearly every day lor at least a month; episodes of Cannabis De-
   lusional Disorder.
  B. Impairment in social or occupational functioning due to cannabis use:
  e.g., marked loss of interest in activities previously engaged in, loss of
  friends, absence from work, loss of job, or legal difficulties (other than
  due to a single arrest for possession, purchase, or sale of the substance).
  C. Duration of disturbance of at least one month.

  Diagnostic criteria for Cannabis Dependence
  A. Either a pattern of pathological use or impairment in social or occupa-
  tional functioning due to cannabis use.
      Pattern of pathological use: intoxication throughout the day; use of
  cannabis nearly every day for at least a month; episodes of Cannabis
  Delusional Disorder.
      Impairment in social or occupational functioning due to cannabis
  use: e.g., marked loss of interest in activities previously engaged in, loss
  of friends, absence from work, loss of job, or legal difficulties (other than
  a single arrest due to possession, purchase, or sale of an illegal sub-
  stance).
  B. Tolerance: need for markedly increased amounts of cannabis to achieve
  the desired effect or markedly diminished effect with regular use of the
  same amount

305.1x Tobacco Dependence
The essential features are continuous use of tobacco for at least one month
with either (1) unsuccessful attempts to stop or significantly reduce the amount
of tobacco use on a permanent basis, (2) the development of Tobacco With-
drawal, or (3) the presence of a serious physical disorder (e.g., respiratory or
cardiovascular disease) that the individual knows is exacerbated by tobacco use.
In practice this diagnosis will be given only when either the individual is
seeking professional help to stop smoking, or, in the judgment of the diagnosti-


                                        Substance Use Disorders 177

cian, the use of tobacco is seriously affecting the individual's physical health.
It should also be noted that a heavy smoker who has never tried to stop smoking,
who has never developed Tobacco Withdrawal, and who has no tobacco-
related serious physical disorder, according to the criteria in this manual, does
not have the disorder of Tobacco Dependence, even though physiologically the
individual is almost certainly dependent on tobacco.
    At present, the most common form of Tobacco Dependence is associated
with the inhalation of cigarette smoke. Pipe and cigar smoking, the use of snuff,
and the chewing of tobacco are less likely to lead to Tobacco Dependence for
several reasons. First of all, the probability of developing serious health com-
plications is lower than with cigarette smoking, probably because relatively little
smoke is inhaled; consequently, there is less distress arising from health con-
cerns about the need to take the substance repeatedly. Second, the more rapid
onset of nicotine effects with cigarette smoking leads to a more intensive habit
pattern that is more difficult to give up owing to the frequency of reinforce-
ment or the greater physical dependence on nicotine.
    In recent years the evidence that tobacco use predisposes to a variety of
serious physical disorders has led many individuals who are heavy smokers to
attempt to give up the habit. However, many are unable to stop at all or, if they
do, often resume tobacco use within a matter of months.
    The difficulty in giving up tobacco use on a long-term basis, particularly
with cigarettes, may be due to the unpleasant nature of the withdrawal syn-
drome, the highly overlearned nature of the habit that stems from the repeated
effects of nicotine, which rapidly follow the inhalation of cigarette smoke (75,000
puffs per year for a pack-a-day smoker), and the likelihood that a desire to use
tobacco is elicited by environmental cues, such as the ubiquitous presence of
other smokers and the widespread availability of cigarettes.
    When efforts to give up smoking are made, Tobacco Withdrawal may
develop. (For a discussion of Tobacco Withdrawal, see p. 159.)
    The most common tobacco-related serious physical disorders are bronchitis,
emphysema, coronary artery disease, peripheral vascular disease, and a variety
of cancers. The diagnostician must assess the role of tobacco use as an etiological
or exacerbating factor for the particular individual after considering both indi-
vidual circumstances and the latest available scientific information. If the indi-
vidual with a serious case of one of the tobacco-related physical disorders con-
tinues to use tobacco, despite awareness of its harmful effects, a reasonable in-
ference can be made that the individual is dependent on tobacco.

    Associated features. Individuals with this disorder are frequently distressed
at their inability to stop tobacco use, particularly when they have serious physi-
cal symptoms that are aggravated by tobacco use. Some individuals who are
dependent on tobacco may have difficulty remaining in social or occupational
situations that prohibit smoking.

    Age at onset. Tobacco Dependence usually begins in late adolescence or
early adult life.


178 Diagnostic Categories

    Course. The course of Tobacco Dependence is variable. Some individuals
repeatedly attempt to give up tobacco use without success. Others have a brief
course, in that when they experience concern about tobacco use they make a
prompt effort to stop and are successful in total cessation, although in many
cases they may experience a period of Tobacco Withdrawal lasting from days
to weeks (see p. 159). Studies of treatment outcome suggest that the relapse rate
is greater than 50% in the first six months, and approximately 70% within the
first twelve months. After a year's abstinence subsequent relapse is unlikely.

    Impairment. Since tobacco use rarely causes any identifiable state of intoxi-
cation as does alcohol, there is no impairment in social or occupational func-
tioning as an immediate and direct consequence of tobacco use.

    Prevalence and sex ratio. A large proportion of the adult population of the
United States uses tobacco, the prevalence among men being greater than that
among women. Among teenage smokers, boys are affected approximately as often
as girls. The prevalence of Tobacco Dependence as defined here is not known.
Some individuals give up smoking as they grow older without ever meeting
the criteria for the disorder. However, since surveys have shown that approxi-
mately 50% of smokers express a desire to be able to stop and are unable to do
so, and since serious physical disorders that are aggravated by smoking are
common, Tobacco Dependence is obviously widespread.

    Familial pattern. Cigarette smoking among family members of individuals
with Tobacco Dependence is more common than in the general population.
However, the evidence for a genetic factor is extremely weak.

    Differential diagnosis. The major differential diagnostic problems will be to
determine whether or not a particular physical disorder, in an individual who
is a heavy smoker, is exacerbated by tobacco use, and how long a period of
abstinence from tobacco use justifies the judgment that the disorder is no longer
present or is in a state of remission.

  Diagnostic criteria for Tobacco Dependence
  A. Continuous use of tobacco for at least one month.

  B. At least one of the following:

      (1) serious attempts to stop or significantly reduce the amount of
      tobacco use on a permanent basis have been unsuccessful
      (2) attempts to stop smoking have led to the development of
      Tobacco Withdrawal (see p. 159}
      (3) the individual continues to use tobacco despite a serious physical
      disorder (e.g., respiratory or cardiovascular disease) that he or she
      knows is exacerbated by tobacco use


                                        Substance Use Disorders 179

305.9x Other, Mixed, or Unspecified Substance Abuse
Other Substance Abuse should be recorded if a substance abused cannot
be classified in any of the categories noted above, e.g., glue (inhalants), amyl
nitrite.

    Mixed Substance Abuse should be noted when the substances abused are
from more than one nonalcoholic substance category, e.g., amphetamines and
barbiturates. This category should be used only when the specific substances
cannot be identified or when the abuse involves so many substances that the
clinician prefers to indicate a combination of substances rather than list each
specific substance.

    Unspecified Substance Abuse should be recorded when a substance abused
is unknown.

304.6x Other Specified Substance Dependence
This category should be used when the individual is dependent on a sub-
stance that cannot be classified in any of the previous categories, e.g., codeine
or corticosteroids.

304.9x Unspecified Substance Dependence
This diagnosis can be used as an initial diagnosis in cases in which the
specific substance is not yet known.

304.7x Dependence on a Combination of Opioid and Other Nonalcoholic Sub-
stances
This category should be used when the individual is dependent on both
an opioid and a nonopioid nonalcoholic substance. An example might be de-
pendence on both heroin and barbiturates. This category should be used only
when the specific substances cannot be identified or when the dependence in-
volves so many substances that the clinician prefers to indicate a combination
of substances rather than list each specific substance.

304.8x Dependence on a Combination of Substances, Excluding Opioids and
Alcohol
This category should be used when the individual is dependent on two
or more nonopioid nonalcoholic substances. An example might be dependence
on both amphetamines and barbiturates. This category should be used only when
the specific substances cannot be identified or when the dependence involves
so many substances that the clinician prefers to indicate a combination of sub-
stances rather than list each specific substance.


This page intentionally left blank 


                    Schizophrenic Disorders


The essential features of this group of disorders* are: the presence of certain
psychotic features during the active phase of the illness, characteristic symptoms
involving multiple psychological processes, deterioration from a previous level
of functioning, onset before age 45, and a duration of at least six months. The
disturbance is not due to an Affective Disorder or Organic Mental Disorder. At
some phase of the illness Schizophrenia always involves delusions, hallucina-
tions, or certain disturbances in the form of thought.
    The limits of the concept of Schizophrenia are unclear. Some approaches
to defining the concept have emphasized the tendency toward a deteriorating
course (Kraepelin), underlying disturbances in certain psychological processes
(Bleuler), or pathognomonic symptoms (Schneider). In this manual the concept
is not limited to illnesses with a deteriorating course, although a minimal
duration of illness is required since the accumulated evidence suggests that
illnesses of briefer duration (here called Schizophreniform Disorder) are likely
to have different external correlates, such as family history and likelihood of
recurrence. The approach taken here excludes illnesses without overt psychotic
features, which have been referred to as Latent, Borderline, or Simple Schizo-
phrenia.t Such cases are likely to be diagnosed in this manual as having a
Personality Disorder such as Schizotypal Personality Disorder. Illnesses with
onset after mid-adult life are also excluded, and may be classified as Atypical
Psychosis. Furthermore, individuals who develop a depressive or manic syn-
drome for an extended period relative to the duration of certain psychotic fea-
tures or before the psychotic features appear, are not classified as having
Schizophrenia but rather as having either an Affective or Schizoaffective Dis-
order. Thus, this manual utilizes clinical criteria that include both a minimum
duration and a characteristic symptom picture to identify a group of conditions
that has validity in terms of differential response to somatic therapy; presence
of a familial pattern; and a tendency toward onset in early adult life, recurrence
and deterioration in social and occupational functioning.

    Deterioration from a previous level of functioning. Schizophrenia always
involves deterioration from a previous level of functioning during some phase
of the illness in such areas as work, social relations, and self-care. Family and
friends often observe that the person is "not the same/'

* Although Schizophrenia is most likely a group of disorders of differing etiologies, common usage
refers to "Schizophrenia" rather than the technically more accurate term, Schizophrenic Disorders.

t The clinician wishing to use these non-DSM-lll diagnoses may do so since they are included in
ICD-9-CM (p.399).

                                181


182 Diagnostic Categories

    Characteristic symptoms involving multiple psychological processes. Invari-
ably there are characteristic disturbances in several of the following areas: con-
tent and form of thought, perception, affect, sense of self, volition, relationship
to the external world, and psychomotor behavior. It should be noted that no
single feature is invariably present or seen only in Schizophrenia.

    Content of thought. The major disturbance in the content of thought
involves delusions that are often multiple, fragmented, or bizarre (i.e., patently
absurd, with no possible basis in fact). Simple persecutory delusions involving
the belief that others are spying on, spreading false rumors about, or planning
harm to the individual are common. Delusions of reference, in which events,
objects, or other people are given particular and unusual significance, usually
of a negative or pejorative nature, are also common. For example, the individual
may be convinced that a television commentator is mocking him.
    Certain delusions are far more common in this disorder than in other
psychotic disorders. These include, for instance, the belief or experience that
one's thoughts, as they occur, are broadcast from one's head to the external
world so that others can hear them (thought broadcasting); that thoughts that
are not one's own are inserted into one's mind (thought insertion); that thoughts
have been removed from one's head (thought withdrawal); or that one's feelings,
impulses, thoughts, or actions are not one's own but are imposed by some
external force (delusions of being controlled). Less commonly, somatic, gran-
 diose, religious, and nihilistic delusions are seen. Overvalued ideas may occur
 (e.g., preoccupation with the special significance of certain dietary habits), or
markedly illogical thinking (e.g., thinking that contains clear internal contra-
 dictions or in which conclusions are reached that are clearly erroneous, given the
 initial premises).

     Form of thought. A disturbance in the form of thought is often present.
 This has been referred to as "formal thought disorder," and is distinguished
 from a disorder in the content of thought. The most common example of this is
 loosening of associations, in which ideas shift from one subject to another com-
 pletely unrelated or only obliquely related subject, without the speaker showing
 any awareness that the topics are unconnected. Statements that lack a meaning-
 ful relationship may be juxtaposed, or the individual may shift idiosyncratically
 from one frame of reference to another. When loosening of associations is
 severe, incoherence may occur, that is, speech may become incomprehensible.
 There may also be poverty of content of speech, in which speech is adequate
 in amount but conveys little information because it is vague, overly abstract or
 overly concrete, repetitive, or stereotyped. The listener can recognize this dis-
 turbance by noting that little if any information has been conveyed although
 the individual has spoken at some length. Less common disturbances include
 neologisms, perseveration, clanging, and blocking.

     Perception. The major disturbances in perception are various forms of
 hallucination. Although these occur in all modalities, by far the most common
 are auditory, frequently involving voices the individual perceives as coming


                                         Schizophrenic Disorders 183

from outside the head. The voices may be familiar, and often make insulting
statements. The voices may be single or multiple. Voices speaking directly to
the individual or commenting on his or her ongoing behavior are particularly
characteristic. Command hallucinations may be obeyed, at times creating danger
for the individual or others. Occasionally, the auditory hallucinations are of
sounds rather than voices. Tactile hallucinations may be present, and typically
involve electrical, tingling, or burning sensations. Somatic hallucinations, such
as the sensation of snakes crawling inside the abdomen, are occasionally ex-
perienced. Visual, gustatory, and olfactory hallucinations also occur, but with
less frequency, and, in the absence of auditory hallucinations, always raise the
possibility of an Organic Mental Disorder.
    Other perceptual abnormalities include sensations of bodily change and
hypersensitivity to sound, sight, and smell.

    Affect. The disturbance often involves blunting, flattening, or inappropri-
ateness of affect. In blunted affect there is severe reduction in the intensity of
affective expression. In flat affect there are virtually no signs of affective ex-
pression; the voice is usually monotonous and the face, immobile. The in-
dividual may complain that he or she no longer responds with normal emotional
intensity or, in extreme cases, no longer has feelings. In inappropriate af-
 fect, the affect is clearly discordant with the content of the individual's speech
 or ideation. For example, while discussing being tortured by electrical shocks,
 an individual with Schizophrenia, Paranoid Type, laughs or smiles. Sudden and
 unpredictable changes in affect involving inexplicable outbursts of anger may
occur.
    Although these affective disturbances are almost invariably present, their
usefulness in making the diagnosis is limited because their presence is often
 difficult to judge except when present in extreme form. Furthermore, the anti-
psychotic drugs have effects that may appear similar to the affective blunting
 and flattening seen in Schizophrenia.

     Sense of self. The sense of self that gives the normal person a feeling of
 individuality, uniqueness, and self-direction is frequently disturbed. This is
 sometimes referred to as a loss of ego boundaries and is frequently manifested
 by extreme perplexity about one's own identity and the meaning of existence, or
 by some of the specific delusions described above, particularly those involving
 control by an outside force.

     Volition. Nearly always there is some disturbance in self-initiated, goal-
 directed activity, which may grossly impair work or other role functioning. This
 may take the form of inadequate interest or drive or inability to follow a course
 of action to its logical conclusion. Pronounced ambivalence regarding alternative
 courses of action can lead to near cessation of goal-directed activity.

     Relationship to the external world. Frequently there is a tendency to with-
 draw from involvement with the external world and to become preoccupied with
 egocentric and illogical ideas and fantasies in which objective facts are obscured,


184 Diagnostic Categories

distorted, or excluded. When severe, this condition has been referred to as
"autism." Family members or friends frequently comment that the individual
seems preoccupied, in his or her own world, and emotionally detached from
others.
    Psychomotor behavior. Various disturbances in psychomotor behavior are
observed, particularly in the chronically severe and acutely florid forms of the
disorder. A marked decrease may occur in reactivity to the environment, with
a reduction in spontaneous movements and activity. In extreme cases the indi-
vidual appears unaware of the nature of the environment (as in catatonic stu-
por) ; may maintain a rigid posture resisting efforts to be moved (as in catatonic
rigidity); may make apparently purposeless and stereotyped, excited motor
movements not influenced by external stimuli (as in catatonic excitement); may
voluntarily assume inappropriate or bizarre postures (as in catatonic posturing);
or resist and actively counteract instructions or attempts to be moved (as in
catatonic negativism). In addition, mannerisms, grimacing, or waxy flexibility
may be present.

    Associated features. Almost any symptom can occur as an associated fea-
ture. The individual may appear perplexed, disheveled, or eccentrically groomed
or dressed. Abnormalities of psychomotor activity—e.g., pacing, rocking, or
apathetic immobility—are common. Frequently, there is poverty of speech, that
is, a restriction in the amount of spontaneous speech, so that replies to questions
tend to be brief, concrete, and unelaborated. Ritualistic or stereotyped behavior
associated with magical thinking often occurs. Dysphoric mood is common, and
may take the form of depression, anxiety, anger, or a mixture of these. De-
personalization, derealization, ideas of reference, and illusions are often present,
as are hypochondriacal concerns that may or may not be delusional. Typically,
no disturbance in sensorium is evident, although during a period of exacerbation
the individual may be confused and even disoriented, or have memory impair-
ment.

    Age at onset. Onset is usually during adolescence or early adulthood.

    Course. As noted previously, the diagnosis of Schizophrenia requires that
continuous signs of the illness have lasted for at least six months which always
includes an active phase of psychotic symptoms, and may or may not include
prodromal or residual phases.
    The development of the active phase of the illness is usually preceded by a
prodromal phase in which there is a clear deterioration in a previous level of
functioning. This phase is characterized by social withdrawal, impairment in
role functioning, peculiar behavior, impairment in personal hygiene and groom-
ing, blunted or inappropriate affect, disturbances in communication, bizarre
ideation, and unusual perceptual experiences. A change in personality is often
noted by friends or relatives. The length of this prodromal phase is extremely
variable, and its onset may be difficult to date accurately. The prognosis is
especially poor when the prodromal phase has taken an insidious, downhill
course over many years.


                                         Schizophrenic Disorders 185

    During the active phase psychotic symptoms—e.g., delusions, hallucina-
tions, loosening of associations, incoherence, poverty of content of speech,
markedly illogical thinking, and behavior that is grossly disorganized or cata-
tonic—are prominent. The specific psychotic symptoms are noted in criterion A
of the diagnostic criteria (p. 188). The onset of the active phase, either initially
or as an exacerbation of a preexisting active phase, is often associated with a
psychosocial stressor.
    Usually a residual phase follows the active phase of the illness. The clinical
picture of this phase is similar to that of the prodromal phase, although affective
blunting or flattening and impairment in role functioning tend to be more
common in the residual phase. During the residual phase some of the psychotic
symptoms, such as delusions or hallucinations, may persist, but are no longer
accompanied by strong affect.
    A complete return to premorbid functioning is unusual—so rare, in fact,
that some clinicians would question the diagnosis. However, there is always the
possibility of full remission or recovery, although its frequency is unknown. The
most common course is one of acute exacerbations with increasing residual
impairment between episodes.
    Numerous studies have indicated a group of factors associated with good
prognosis: absence of premorbid personality disturbance, adequate premorbid
social functioning, precipitating events, abrupt onset, onset in mid-life, a clinical
picture that involves confusion, and a family history of Affective Disorder.
    Because a knowledge of course is very important for planning treatment,
and because differences in course may reflect fundamental differences among
Schizophrenic Disorders, a separate digit is provided for coding the course as
Subchronic, Chronic, Subchronic with Acute Exacerbation, Chronic with Acute
Exacerbation, or In Remission (for criteria, see p. 192).
    Since a six-month duration of illness is required for the diagnosis, there is
no acute subtype. (The DSM-III diagnosis of Schizophreniform Disorder is the
nearest equivalent to the DSM-II and ICD-9-CM concepts of Acute Schizo-
phrenic Episode. Frequently, an episode of Schizophreniform Disorder will per-
sist for more than six months, in which case the diagnosis should be changed to
Schizophrenia.)

    Impairment. Invariably there is impairment in several areas of routine daily
functioning, such as work, social relations, and self-care. Supervision may be
required to ensure that nutritional and hygienic needs are met and to protect
the individual from the consequences of poor judgment, cognitive impairment,
or actions based on delusions or in response to hallucinations. Between episodes
of illness there may be no disability or the extent of disability ranges from none
to disability so severe that institutional care is required.

    Complications. Although violent acts performed by individuals with this
disorder often attract public attention, whether the frequency of such acts is
greater than in the general population is not known. The life expectancy of
individuals with Schizophrenia is shorter than that of the general population
because of an increased suicide rate and death from a variety of other causes—


186 Diagnostic Categories

some, at least in the past, associated with institutional care. Other causes of
death are associated with the economically deprived environments in which
many individuals with this disorder live.

    Premorbid personality. The premorbid personalities of individuals who
develop Schizophrenia are often described as suspicious, introverted, withdrawn,
or eccentric. Such individuals may meet the criteria for Paranoid, Schizoid,
Schizotypal, or Borderline Personality Disorder. In such cases, since it can have
prognostic significance, the Personality Disorder should be noted on Axis II,
followed by the phrase "(Premorbid)."

    Predisposing factors. The diagnosis is made more commonly among the
lower socioeconomic groups. The reasons for this are unclear, but may involve
downward social drift, lack of upward socioeconomic mobility, and high stress.
    Certain patterns of family interaction have been hypothesized as predis-
posing to the development, onset, relapse or chronicity of Schizophrenia. The
interpretation of the evidence supporting these hypotheses is controversial.

    Prevalence. Studies in Europe and Asia, using a relatively narrow concept
 of Schizophrenia, have found a lifetime prevalence rate of from 0.2% to almost
 1%. Studies done in the United States that have used broader criteria and
 surveyed urban populations have reported higher rates.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is apparently equally common in males and in
 females.

     Familial pattern. All investigators have found a higher prevalence of the
 disorder among family members. This includes studies in which the adopted
 offspring of individuals with Schizophrenia have been reared by parents who
 do not have Schizophrenia. Twin studies consistently show a higher concordance
 rate of Schizophrenia for monozygotic than dizygotic twins, and dizygotic twins
 have the same concordance rate as siblings who are not twins. However, being
 a monozygotic twin does not in itself predispose to the development of Schizo-
 phrenia. Although genetic factors have been proven to be involved in the
 development of the illness, the existence of a substantial discordance rate, even
 in monozygotic twins, indicates the importance of nongenetic factors.

     Differential diagnosis. Organic Mental Disorders often present with symp-
 toms that suggest Schizophrenia, such as delusions, hallucinations, incoherence,
 and blunted or inappropriate affect. In particular, Organic Delusional Syn-
 dromes, such as those due to amphetamines or phencyclidine, may cross-
 sectionally be identical in symptomatology with Schizophrenia. Even though an
 active phase of Schizophrenia may begin with confusion, the presence of dis-
 orientation or memory impairment strongly suggests an Organic Mental Dis-
 order. (Of course, it is possible for an individual with Schizophrenia to have a
 superimposed Organic Mental Disorder.)


                                         Schizophrenic Disorders 187

    Paranoid Disorders are distinguished from Schizophrenia by the absence
of prominent hallucinations, incoherence, loosening of associations, or bizarre
delusions, such as delusions of being controlled or thought broadcasting.
    In Affective Disorders there often are withdrawal and deterioration in func-
tioning. These should not be mistaken for prodromal signs of Schizophrenia. In
Affective Disorders the development of delusions or hallucinations follows a
period of affective disturbance. For this reason the diagnosis of Schizophrenia is
not made unless an affective syndrome, if present, developed after any psychotic
symptoms or was brief in duration relative to the duration of the characteristic
psychotic symptoms. The differential diagnosis of Schizophrenia from the
psychotic forms of the Affective Disorders, particularly Bipolar Disorder, is of
special importance because of the different long-term treatment implications. A
manic episode with anger and paranoid delusions needs to be distinguished from
Schizophrenia, Paranoid Type. However, an Atypical Affective Disorder or
Adjustment Disorder with Depressed Mood may be superimposed on Schizo-
phrenia, Residual Type. An example would be an individual with Schizophrenia,
Residual Type, Chronic, who could develop a major depressive episode of several
months' duration without any psychotic symptoms. In such a case both Schizo-
phrenia and Atypical Depression should be diagnosed.
    The diagnosis Schizoaffective Disorder should be made whenever the clini-
cian is unable to make a differential diagnosis between Schizophrenia and
Affective Disorder. Although no criteria for Schizoaffective Disorder are pro-
vided in this manual, several examples of clinical situations in which this
diagnosis might be appropriate are given on p. 202.
    In Schizophreniform Disorder, by definition the duration of the illness is
less than six months. The cross-sectional symptom picture may be indistinguish-
able from Schizophrenia, but emotional turmoil and confusion are more likely
to occur in Schizophreniform Disorder. It should be noted that the six-month
duration of illness required for Schizophrenia refers to a continuous period of
illness. Thus, an individual with several episodes of Schizophreniform Disorder
from each of which there has been full recovery would not be diagnosed as
having Schizophrenia merely because the total period of illness exceeded six
months.
    Atypical Psychosis is diagnosed when there is a nonaffective psychotic
disorder but there is insufficient information to make a diagnosis of Schizo-
phrenia. It is also diagnosed in those unusual instances in which one of the
psychotic symptoms of Schizophrenia such as an encapsulated delusion of bodily
change is present, but there is apparently no deterioration from a previous level
of functioning.
    In a Pervasive Developmental Disorder, the cross-sectional picture, particu-
larly of the Residual State, may resemble Schizophrenia, Residual Type. How-
ever, there is no history of delusions, hallucinations, or incoherence.
    In Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, Hypochondriasis, and more rarely
Phobic Disorder, in order to account for the symptoms the individual may
develop overvalued ideas that are difficult to distinguish from delusions. How-
ever, individuals with these disorders recognize, at least to some degree, that
their symptoms and thinking are irrational, even if they are dominated by them.


188 Diagnostic Categories

    In Factitious Disorder with Psychological Symptoms, "psychotic" symptoms
are under the individual's voluntary control and are likely to be present only
when the individual thinks he or she is being observed.
    In Personality Disorders, especially Schizotypal, Borderline, Schizoid, and
Paranoid types transient psychotic symptoms may occur. However, a return
within hours or days to the usual level of functioning distinguishes these dis-
orders from Schizophrenia. It is more difficult to distinguish severe forms of
Paranoid and Schizotypal Personality Disorders from Schizophrenia because of
the difficulty in determining whether the paranoid ideation is of delusional
intensity and whether the oddities of communication and perception are severe
enough to meet the criteria for Schizophrenia. Furthermore, it is often difficult
to differentiate the prodromal phase of Schizophrenia from the manifestations
of some of the Personality Disorders since both Personality Disorders and
Schizophrenia usually develop during adolescence or early adult life.
    Beliefs or experiences of members of religious or other subcultural groups
may be difficult to distinguish from delusions or hallucinations. When such
experiences are shared and accepted by a subcultural group they should not be
considered evidence of psychosis.
    In Mental Retardation, low level of social functioning, oddities of behavior,
and impoverished affect and cognition all may suggest Schizophrenia. Both
diagnoses should be made in the same individual only when there is certainty
that the symptoms suggesting Schizophrenia, such as delusions or hallucinations,
are definitely present and are not the result of difficulties in communication.


  Diagnostic criteria for a Schizophrenic Disorder
  A. At least one of the following during a phase of the HI ness:

      (1) bizarre delusions (content Is patently absurd and has no pos-
      sible basis In fact), such as delusions of being controlled, thought
      broadcasting, thought insertron/or thought withdrawal
      (2) somatic, grandiose, religious, nihilistic, or other delusions with-
      out persecutery or jealous content
      (3) delusions with persecutory or jealous content if accompanied
      by hallucinations of any type
      (4) auditory hallucinations in which either a voice keeps up a running
      commentary on the individual's behavior or thoughts, or two or more
      voices converse with each other
      {5} auditory hallucinations on several occasions with content of
      more than one or two words, having no apparent relation to depres-
      sion or elation
      (6) incoherence, marked loosening of associations, markedly illogical
      thinking, or marked poverty of content of speech if associated with at
      least one of the following:


                                   Schizophrenic Disorders 189

    (a) blunted, flat, or inappropriate affect
    (b) delusions or hallucinations
    (c) catatonic or other grossly disorganized behavior

B. Deterioration from a ^previouslevel of functioning in such areas as
work, sociahrelatlons> and sell-cart,

C, Duration: Continuous/signs of th& fitness for at least six months at
some time during the -person's^ life, wrtVi some signs of the illness at pres-
ent. The six-month period must include aft active phase during which there
were symptoms from A, with or without a prodromal or residual phase, as
defined below.

    Prodrome/ phase: A deaf^cteteHomtion in functioning before the
active phase of the illness not due lo a disturbance in mood or to a Sub-
stance Use Disorder and involving at least two of the symptoms noted
below.

    Residual phase: Persistence, .following the active phase of the illness,
of at least two of the symptoms noted below, not due to a disturbance
in' mood• or ...to a.. Substance- Use0 Qlsorder.

  Prodromal or fesfcte/ Symptoms
    (1) social isolation or withdrawal
    (2) marked impairment in role functioning as wage-earner, student,
    or homemaker
    (3) markedly peculiar;behavior (e.jg«, collecting garbage, talking to
    self in publiq, Orr;hoafdtag:|$ipd}^,',;••'• '-•' -- •-
    (4) marked impairment In-ij^^'al^giehe and grooming
    (5) blunted, flat, or tftapprbpttate affect
    (6) digressiv% vague, overelaborate, circumstantial, or metaphorical
    speech
    (7) odd or bizarre ideation, or magical thinking, e,g,, superstitious-
    ness, clairvoyance, telepathy, "sixth sense/' "others can feel my feel-
    ings," overvalued ideas, ideas of reference
    (8) unusual perceptual experiences, e.g., recurrent illusions, sensing
    the presence of a force or person not actually present

   •fxamp/es; Six months of prodromal symptoms with one week of
symptoms from A; no prodromal symptoms with six months of symptoms
from A; no prodromal symptoms with two weeks of symptoms from A
and six months of residual symptoms; six months of symptoms from A,
apparently followed by several years of complete remission, with one
week of symptoms in A In current episode.


190 Diagnostic Categories

  D. The full depressive or manic syndrome (criteria A and B of major de-
  pressive or manic episode), if present, developed after any psychotic
  symptoms, or was brief in duration relative to the duration of the psy-
  chotic symptoms in A,

  E. Onset of prodromal or active phase of the illness before age 45,

  F. Not due to any Organic Mental Disorder or Mental Retardation.

TYPES
The types reflect cross-sectional clinical syndromes. Some are less stable over
time than others, and their prognostic and treatment implications are variable.
The diagnosis of a particular type should be based on the predominant clinical
picture that occasioned the evaluation or admission to clinical care.

295.1% Disorganized Type
The essential features are marked incoherence and flat, incongruous, or silly
affect. There are no systematized delusions although fragmentary delusions or
hallucinations in which the content is not organized into a coherent theme are
common. Associated features include grimaces, mannerisms, hypochondriacal
complaints, extreme social withdrawal, and other oddities of behavior.
    This clinical picture is usually associated with extreme social impairment,
poor premorbid personality, an early and insidious onset, and a chronic course
without significant remissions.
    In other classifications this type is termed Hebephrenic.

  Diagnostic criteria for Disorganized Type
  A type of Schizophrenia in which there are:

  A. Frequent incoherence.

  B, Absence of systematized delusions,

  C Blunted, inappropriate, or silly affect.

295.2x Catatonic Type
The essential feature is marked psychomotor disturbance, which may involve
stupor, negativism, rigidity, excitement, or posturing. Sometimes there is rapid
alternation between the extremes of excitement and stupor. Associated features
include stereotypies, mannerisms, and waxy flexibility. Mutism is particularly
common.
    During catatonic stupor or excitement the individual needs careful super-
vision to avoid hurting self or others, and medical care may be needed because


                                        Schizophrenic Disorders 191

of malnutrition, exhaustion, hyperpyrexia, or self-inflicted injury.
    Although this type was very common several decades ago, it is now rare
in Europe and North America.

   Diagnostic criteria for Catatonic Type
   A type of Schizophrenia dominated by any of the following:

       (1) catatonic stupor (marked decrease in reactivity to environment
      and/or reduction of spontaneous movements and activity) or mutism
       (2) catatonic negativism (an apparently motiveless resistance to all
       instructions or attempts to be moved)
       (3) catatonic rigidity (maintenance of a rigid posture against efforts
       to be moved)
       (4) catatonic excitement (excited motor activity, apparently purpose-
       less and not influenced by external stimuli)
       (5) catatonic posturing (voluntary assumption of inappropriate or
      bizarre posture)

 295.3x Paranoid Type
The essential features are prominent persecutory or grandiose delusions, or hallu-
 cinations with a persecutory or grandiose content. In addition, delusional jeal-
 ousy may be present.
    Associated features include unfocused anxiety, anger, argumentativeness,
 and violence. In addition, there may be doubts about gender identity or fear of
 being thought of as a homosexual, or being approached by homosexuals.
     The impairment in functioning may be minimal if the delusional material
 is not acted upon, since gross disorganization of behavior is relatively rare.
 Similarly, affective responsiveness may be preserved. Often a stilted, formal
 quality, or extreme intensity in interpersonal interactions is noted.
    The onset tends to be later in life than the other subtypes, and the features
 are more stable over time. If a biologically related family member of an indi-
 vidual who has this subtype also has Schizophrenia, there is some evidence that
 the subtype of the relative will also be paranoid.

   Diagnostic criteria lor Paranoid Type
   A type of Schizophrenia dominated by one or more of the following;

       (1) persecutory delusions
       (2) grandiose delusions
       (3) delusional jealousy
       (4) hallucinations with persecutory or grandiose content

 295.9x Undifferentiated Type
 The essential features are prominent psychotic symptoms that cannot be classi-


192 Diagnostic Categories

fied in any category previously listed or that meet the criteria for more than
one.


  Diagnostic criteria for Undifferentiated Type
  A. A type of Schizophrenia in which there are: Prominent delusions,
  hallucinations, incoherence, or grossly disorganized behavior.

  8. Does not meet the criteria for any of the previously listed types or
  meets the criteria for more than one.

295.6x Residual Type
This category should be used when there has been at least one episode of
Schizophrenia but the clinical picture that occasioned the evaluation or admis-
sion to clinical care is without prominent psychotic symptoms, though signs of
the illness persist. Emotional blunting, social withdrawal, eccentric behavior,
illogical thinking and loosening of associations are common. If delusions or
hallucinations are present, they are not prominent and are not accompanied by
strong affect.
    The course of this type is either chronic or subchronic, since "acute exacer-
bation" by definition, involves prominent psychotic symptoms, and "in remis-
sion" implies no signs of the illness.

  Diagnostic criteria for Residual Type
  A. A history of at least one previous episode of Schizophrenia with
  prominent psychotic symptoms.

  B. A clinical picture without any prominent psychotic symptoms that
  occasioned evaluation or admission to clinical care.

  C Continuing evidence of the illness> such as blunted or inappropriate
  affect, social withdrawal, eccentric behavior, illogical thinking, or loosen-
  ing of associations.

  Classification of course. The course of the illness is coded in the fifth digit:
      (1) Subchronic. The time from the beginning of the illness, during
      which the individual began to show signs of the illness (including
      prodromal, active, and residual phases) more or less continuously, is
      less than two years but at least six months.
      {2} Chronic. Same as above, but greater than two years.


                                         Schizophrenic Disorders 193

       (3) Subchronic with Acute Exacerbation. Reemergence of prominent
       psychotic symptoms in an individual with a subchronic course who
       has been in the residual phase of the illness.
       (4) Chronic with Acute Exacerbation. Reemergence of prominent
       psychotic symptoms in an individual with a chronic course who has
       been in the residual phase of the illness.
       (5) In Remission, This should be used when an individual with a
      history of Schizophrenia, now is free of all signs of the illness
       (whether or not on medication). The differentiation of Schizophrenia
       In Remission from no mental disorder requires consideration of the
      period of time since the last period of disturbance, the total dura-
      tion of the disturbance, and the need for continued evaluation or
      prophylactic treatment

When the course is noted as "in remission/' the phenomenologic type should
describe the last episode of Schizophrenia, e.g., 295.25 Schizophrenia, Catatonic
Type, In Remission. When the phenomenology of the last episode is unknown,
it should be noted as Undifferentiated.


This page intentionally left blank 


                             Paranoid Disorders


The essential features are persistent persecutory delusions or delusional jeal-
ousy, not due to any other mental disorder, such as a Schizophrenic, Schizo-
phreniform, Affective, or Organic Mental Disorder. The Paranoid Disorders
include Paranoia, Shared Paranoid Disorder, and Acute Paranoid Disorder.
    The boundaries of this group of disorders and their differentiation from
such other disorders as severe Paranoid Personality Disorder and Schizophrenia,
Paranoid Type, are unclear.
    The persecutory delusions may be simple or elaborate and usually involve a
single theme or series of connected themes, such as being conspired against,
cheated, spied upon, followed, poisoned or drugged, maliciously maligned,
harassed, or obstructed in the pursuit of long-term goals. Small slights may be
exaggerated and become the focus of a delusional system.
    There may be only delusional jealousy ("conjugal paranoia"), in which
an individual may become convinced without due cause, that his or her mate is
unfaithful. Small bits of "evidence," such as disarrayed clothing or spots on
the sheets, may be collected and used to justify the delusion.

    Associated features. Common associated features include resentment and
anger, which may lead to violence. Grandiosity and ideas or delusions of
reference are common. Often there is social isolation, seclusiveness, or eccen-
tricities of behavior. Suspiciousness, either generalized or focused on certain
individuals, is common. Letter writing, complaining about various injustices,
and instigation of legal action are frequent. These individuals rarely seek treat-
ment, and often are brought for care by associates, relatives, or governmental
agencies as a result of the individuals' angry or litigious activities.

    Age at onset. Generally middle or late adult life.

    Course. The course of Paranoia and Shared Paranoid Disorder is chronic
with few, if any, exacerbations or periods of remission. The course of Acute
Paranoid Disorder, by definition, is limited to six months' duration.

    Impairment* Impairment in daily functioning is rare. Intellectual and occu-
pational functioning are usually preserved, even when the disorder is chronic.
Social and marital functioning, on the other hand, are often severely impaired.

    Complications. None.

    Predisposing factors. Immigration, emigration, deafness, and other severe

                                195


196 Diagnostic Categories

stresses may predispose to the development of a Paranoid Disorder. Individuals
with Paranoid or Schizoid Personality Disorders may also have a greater likeli-
hood of developing a Paranoid Disorder.

    Prevalence. Paranoid Disorders are thought to be rare. However, Paranoia
involving delusional jealousy may be more common.

    Sex ratio and familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. In Organic Delusional Syndromes, particularly those
induced by amphetamines, persecutory delusions are common.
    In Schizophrenia, Paranoid Type, or Schizophreniform Disorder, there are
certain symptoms, such as incoherence, marked loosening of associations, prom-
inent hallucinations, and bizarre delusions (e.g., delusions of control, thought
broadcasting, withdrawal, or insertion), that are not present in Paranoid Dis-
orders. Although delusions that others are attempting to control the individual's
behavior are common in both Paranoid and Schizophrenic Disorders, the expe-
rience of being controlled by alien forces suggests Schizophrenia or Schizo-
phreniform Disorder. In addition, delusions in Schizophrenia are more likely
to be fragmented and multiple rather than systematized, as in Paranoid Dis-
orders.
    In Paranoid Personality Disorder there may be paranoid ideation or patho-
logical jealousy, but there are no delusions. Whenever an individual with a
Paranoid Disorder has a preexisting Personality Disorder, including Paranoid
Personality Disorder, the Personality Disorder should be listed on Axis II,
followed by the phrase "Premorbid" in parentheses.

  Diagnostic criteria for Paranoid Disorder
  A. Persistent persecutory delusions or delusional jealousy,

  B. Emotion and behavior appropriate to the content of the delusional
  system,

  C. Duration of illness of at least one week.

  D. None of the symptoms of. criterion A of Schizophrenia (p, 188),
  such as bizarre delusions/ -incoherence/ or marked loosening of asso-
  ciations.

  E. No prominent hallucination^.

  F. The full depressive or rnanjq syne! rome (criteria A and B of mafor
  depressive or manic episode, pi 21 3, and p. 208) is either not present, de-
  veloped after any psychotic symptoms, or was brief In duration relative
  to the duration of the psydwtic

  Not due to an Organic Mental- ©i$»rder,


                                              Paranoid Disorderss 197

 297.10 Paranoia
 The essential feature is the insidious development of a Paranoid Disorder with
 a permanent and unshakable delusional system accompanied by preservation of
 clear and orderly thinking. Frequently the individual considers himself or herself
 endowed with unique and superior abilities. Chronic forms of "conjugal para-
 noia" and Involutional Paranoid State should be classified here.

   Diagnostic criteria for Paranoia
   A. Meets the criteria for Paranoid Disorder (p, 196).

   8. A chronic and stable persecytory delusional system of at least six
   months' duration,

   C. Does not meet the criteria for Shared Paranoid Disorder.

 297.30 Shared Paranoid Disorder
 The essential feature is a persecutory delusional system that develops as a
 result of a close relationship with another person who already has a disorder
 with persecutory delusions. The delusions are at least partly shared. Usually, if
 the relationship with the other person is interrupted, the delusional beliefs will
 diminish or disappear. In the past this disorder has been termed Folie a deux,
 although in rare cases, more than two persons may be involved.

   Diagnostic criteria for Shared Paranoid Disorder
   A. Meets the criteria for Paranoid disorder tp. 196).

   B. Delusional system develops as a result of a closer relationship with
   another person or persons Wte hanre'anrestabiishgd. disorder with per-
   secutory delusions;

 298.30 Acute Paranoid Disorder
 The essential feature is a Paranoid Disorder of less than six months' duration.
 It is most commonly seen in individuals who have experienced drastic changes
in their environment, such as immigrants, refugees, prisoners of war, inductees
into military services, or people leaving home for the first time. The onset is
usually relatively sudden and the condition rarely becomes chronic.

  Diagnostic criteria for Acute Paranoid Disorder
  A. Meets the criteria lor Paranoid Disorder (p,Ji6k

  B. Duration of Jess than six months.


+198 Diagnostic Categories

  C Does not meet the criteria for Shared Paranoid Disorder (p. 197).

297.90 Atypical Paranoid Disorder
This is a residual category for Paranoid Disorders not classifiable above.


                    Psychotic Disorders Not
                           Elsewhere Classified


This diagnostic class is for psychotic disorders that cannot be classified as either
an Organic Mental Disorder or a Schizophrenic, Paranoid, or Affective Disorder.
There are three specific categories: Schizophreniform Disorder, Brief Reactive
Psychosis, and Schizoaffective Disorder. Finally, there is a residual category,
Atypical Psychosis, for psychotic disorders that do not meet the criteria for any
specific psychotic disorder. (For a definition of "psychotic," see p. 353.)

295.40 Schizophreniform Disorder
The essential features are identical with those of Schizophrenia with the excep-
tion that the duration, including prodromal, active and residual phases, is less
than six months but more than two weeks. Schizophreniform Disorder is classi-
fied outside the category of Schizophrenic Disorders because evidence suggests
a greater likelihood of emotional turmoil and confusion, a tendency toward acute
onset and resolution, more likely recovery to premorbid levels of functioning,
and the absence of an increase in the prevalence of Schizophrenia among family
members compared with the general population. The six-month criterion has
been chosen because several studies indicate that this is the best single way of
differentiating these two disorders to maximize the difference in their external
correlates. (In the past the term "Schizophreniform" has included cases that
would be classified as Schizoaffective Disorder in this manual. Therefore, some
of the conclusions drawn from that body of research may not apply to Schizo-
phreniform Disorder as defined here.)

    Differential diagnosis. Since the diagnostic criteria for Schizophrenia and
Schizophreniform Disorder differ only in duration of illness, most of the discus-
sion of differential diagnosis in the text for Schizophrenia (p. 186) applies equally
to Schizophreniform Disorder, with the exception that the clinical picture in
Schizophreniform Disorder is more often characterized by emotional turmoil,
fear, confusion, and particularly vivid hallucinations.
    Brief Reactive Psychosis differs from Schizophreniform Disorder in that the
duration of the disturbance is less than two weeks (although secondary effects
may persist longer). In addition, Brief Reactive Psychosis always follows a psy-
chosocial stressor, which frequently is not present before the onset of Schizo-
phreniform Disorder. If what appears to be a Brief Reactive Psychosis persists
beyond two weeks, a diagnosis of Schizophreniform Disorder should be con-
sidered.
    Atypical Psychosis should be diagnosed if the symptom picture is consistent
with that of Schizophreniform Disorder but the duration is less than two weeks
and the disturbance does not follow a psychosocial stressor.

                                199


200 Diagnostic Categories

  Diagnostic criteria for Schizophreniform Disorder
  A. Meets all of the criteria for Schizophrenia (p, 188) except for dura-
  tion.

  B. The illness (including prodromal, active, and residual phases) lasts
  more than two weeks but less than six months.

298.80 Brief Reactive Psychosis
The essential feature is the sudden onset of a psychotic disorder of at least a
few hours' but no more than two weeks' duration, with eventual return to pre-
morbid level of functioning. The psychotic symptoms appear immediately fol-
lowing a recognizable psychosocial stressor that would evoke significant symp-
toms of distress in almost anyone. The precipitating event may be any major
stress, such as the loss of a loved one or the psychological trauma of combat.
Invariably there is emotional turmoil, manifested by rapid shifts from one dys-
phoric affect to another without the persistence of any one affect.
    In order not to misdiagnose this condition when the disturbance is actually
due to a more pervasive disorder, such as Schizophrenia, this diagnosis should
not be made if there was a period of increasing psychopathology immediately
before the psychosocial stressor.

    Associated features. Frequently perplexity and a feeling of confusion are
present, which the individual may acknowledge or which can be judged from the
way he or she responds to questions and requests.
    Behavior may be bizarre and include peculiar postures, outlandish dress,
screaming, or muteness. Suicidal or aggressive behavior may also be present.
Speech may include inarticulate gibberish or repetition of nonsensical phrases.
Affect is often inappropriate and volatile. Transient hallucinations or delusions
are common. Silly or obviously confabulated answers may be given to factual
questions. Disorientation and impairment in recent memory often occur.

    Age at onset. The disorder usually appears in adolescence and early adult-
hood.

    Course. Usually the psychotic symptoms clear in a day or two. By definition
this diagnosis is not applicable if the psychotic symptoms persist for more than
two weeks. Transient secondary effects, such as loss of self-esteem and mild de-
pression, may persist beyond the two weeks, but there is eventually a full return
to the premorbid level of functioning.

    Impairment. Supervision may be required to ensure that nutritional and
hygienic needs are met and that the individual is protected from the conse-
quences of poor judgment, cognitive impairment, or acting on the basis of delu-
sions.

    Complications. None.


                        Psychotic Disorders Not Elsewhere Classified 201

     Predisposing factors. Preexisting psychopathology may predispose to the de-
 velopment of this disorder. Individuals with Paranoid, Histrionic, Narcissistic,
 Schizotypal, or Borderline Personality Disorders are thought to be particularly
 vulnerable to its development. By definition situations involving major stress
 predispose to development of this disorder.

     Prevalence, sex ratio, and familial pattern. No information.

     Differential diagnosis. Although by definition this diagnosis is not made if
 the psychotic symptoms persist for more than two weeks, the diagnosis can be
 made soon after the onset of the disturbance without waiting for the expected
 recovery. If the psychotic symptoms last more than two weeks, the diagnosis
 should be changed to either Schizophreniform Disorder, Paranoid Disorder,
 Affective Disorder, or Atypical Psychosis.
    Organic Mental Disorders, particularly those involving Delirium, Organic
 Delusional Syndrome, or Intoxication, can be distinguished from this disorder
 only on the basis of historical or laboratory information that indicates a known
 organic factor.
    Schizophreniform Disorder by definition requires a duration of more than
 two weeks, and frequently there is no precipitating psychosocial stressor.
    Manic and major depressive episodes may follow a major psychosocial
 stressor. The diagnosis of a manic or major depressive episode preempts the
 diagnosis of Brief Reactive Psychosis, and should be made when the criteria for
 it are met whether or not it is associated with a psychosocial stressor.
    Individuals with a Personality Disorder may, under stress, develop Brief Re-
active Psychosis, in which case both diagnoses should be made.
    An episode of Factitious Disorder with Psychological Symptoms may have
apparently psychotic symptoms and may also be precipitated by a psychosocial
stressor, but in such cases there is evidence that the symptoms are under volun-
tary control.
    When Malingering presents with apparently psychotic symptoms, there is
usually evidence that the illness was feigned for an understandable goal.

  Diagnostic criteria for Brief Reactive Psychosis
  A, Psychotic symptoms appear immediately following a recognizable
  psychosocial stressor that would evoke significant symptoms of distress in
  almost anyone.

  B. The clinical picture involves emotional turmoil and at least one of the
  following psychotic symptoms:

      fl) incoherence or loosening of associations
      (2) delusions
      (3) hallucinations
      {4} behavior that is grossly disorganized or catatonic


202 Diagnostic Categories

  C The psychotic symptoms last more than a few hours but less than two
  weeks, and there is an eventual return to the premorbid level of function-
  ing. (Note: The diagnosis can be made soon after the onset of the psy-
  chotic symptoms without waiting for the expected recovery. If the
  psychotic symptoms last more than two weeks, the diagnosis should be
  changed.)

  D. No period of increasing psychopathology immediately preceded the
  psychosocial stressor.

  E. The disturbance is not due to any other mental disorder, such as an
  Organic Mental Disorder, manic episode, or Factitious Disorder with
  Psychological Symptoms,

295.70 Schizoaffective Disorder
The term Schizoaffective Disorder has been used in many different ways since it
was first introduced, and at the present time there is no consensus on how this
category should be defined. Some of the cases that in the past were diagnosed as
Schizoaffective Disorder would in this manual be diagnosed as Schizophreniform
Disorder, Major Depression or Bipolar Disorder with Mood-congruent or Mood-
incongruent Psychotic Features, or Schizophrenia with a superimposed Atypical
Affective Disorder. Future research is needed to determine whether there is a
need for this category, and if so, how it should be defined and what its relation-
ship is to Schizophrenia and Affective Disorder.
    The category is retained in this manual without diagnostic criteria for those
instances in which the clinician is unable to make a differential diagnosis with
any degree of certainty between Affective Disorder and either Schizophreniform
Disorder or Schizophrenia. Before using the Schizoaffective Disorder category,
the clinician should consider all of the diagnoses noted in the first paragraph
above, particularly Major Affective Disorders with Psychotic Features.
    Examples of cases that may appropriately be diagnosed as Schizoaffective
Disorder include:
        An episode of affective illness in which preoccupation with a mood-
        incongruent delusion or hallucination dominates the clinical picture
        when affective symptoms are no longer present.
        An episode of illness in which currently there is a full affective syn-
        drome with prominent mood-incongruent psychotic features but in
        which inadequate information about the presence of previous non-
        affective psychotic features makes it difficult to differentiate between
        Schizophrenia or Schizophreniform Disorder (with a superimposed
        Atypical Affective Disorder) and Affective Disorder.

298.90 Atypical Psychosis
This is a residual category for cases in which there are psychotic symptoms
(delusions, hallucinations, incoherence, loosening of associations, markedly illog-


                       Psychotic Disorders Not Elsewhere Classified 203

ical thinking, or behavior that is grossly disorganized or catatonic) that do not
meet the criteria for any specific mental disorder.
    Common examples of this category include:
    (1) Psychoses with unusual features, e.g., monosymptomatic delusion of
        bodily change without accompanying impairment in functioning; per-
        sistent auditory hallucinations as the only disturbance; transient psy-
        chotic episodes associated with the menstrual cycle.
    (2) "Postpartum psychoses" that do not meet the criteria for an Organic
        Mental Disorder, Schizophreniform Disorder, Paranoid Disorder, or
        Affective Disorder.
    (3) Psychoses that would be classified elsewhere except that the duration is
        less than two weeks, e.g., the symptomatology of a Schizophreniform
        Disorder, but lasting only three days and there is no precipitating psy-
        chosocial stressor.
    (4) Psychoses about which there is inadequate information to make a more
        specific diagnosis. (This is preferable to Diagnosis Deferred, and can be
        changed if more information becomes available.)
    (5) Psychoses with confusing clinical features that make a more specific
        diagnosis impossible.


This page intentionally left blank 


                               Affective Disorders*


The essential feature of this group of disorders is a disturbance of mood, ac-
 companied by a full or partial manic or depressive syndrome, that is not due
 to any other physical or mental disorder. Mood refers to a prolonged emotion
 that colors the whole psychic life; it generally involves either depression or
 elation. The manic and depressive syndromes each consist of characteristic
 symptoms that tend to occur together.
     In other classifications these disorders are grouped in various categories,
 including Affective, Personality, and Neurotic Disorders.

     Subclassification of Affective Disorders. The classification of Affective Dis-
 orders in DSM-III differs from many other classifications based on such dichot-
 omous distinctions as neurotic vs. psychotic or endogenous vs. reactive.
     In this manual the class Affective Disorders is divided into Major Affective
 Disorders, in which there is a full affective syndrome; Other Specific Affective
 Disorders, in which there is only a partial affective syndrome of at least two
 years' duration; and finally, Atypical Affective Disorders, a category for those
 affective disorders that cannot be classified in either of the two specific sub-
 classes.
     Major Affective Disorders include Bipolar Disorder and Major Depression,
 which are distinguished by whether or not there has ever been a manic episode.
 A category of Manic Disorder is not included in this classification; instead,
 when there has been one or more manic episodes, with or without a history
 of a major depressive episode, the category Bipolar Disorder is used. Bipolar
 Disorder is subclassified at the fourth digit as Mixed, Manic, or Depressed;
 Major Depression is subclassified at the fourth digit as Single Episode or Re-
 current. The current episode is further subclassified at the fifth digit to reflect
 certain characteristics such as the presence of psychotic features and, in the
 case of a major depressive episode, the presence of Melancholia.t
     Other Specific Affective Disorders include Cyclothymic Disorder and Dys-
 thymic Disorder. In Cyclothymic Disorder there are symptoms characteristic of
 both the depressive and the manic syndromes, but they are not of sufficient
 severity and duration to meet the criteria for major depressive or manic episodes.
 In Dysthymic Disorder the symptoms are not of sufficient severity and duration

    * The proper descriptive term for this group of disorders should be "Mood Disorders"; however,
 common usage and historical continuity favor retention of the term "Affective Disorders."
    tA term from the past, in this manual used to indicate a typically severe form of depression
 that is particularly responsive to somatic therapy. The clinical features that characterize this syndrome
 have been referred to as "endogenous." Since the term "endogenous" implies, to many, the absence
 of precipitating stress, a characteristic not always associated with this syndrome, the term "endoge-
 nous" is not used in DSM-III.

                                    205


206 Diagnostic Categories

to meet the criteria for a major depressive episode, and there have been no
hypomanic periods. A theoretically possible third disorder in this group is
Chronic Hypomanic Disorder, which would require hypomanic features of at
least two years' duration, but not depressive periods; the existence of such a
syndrome has not been well enough established to warrant inclusion as a dis-
tinct disorder. These chronic disorders may have a superimposed episode of
Major Affective Disorder, in which case both diagnoses should be recorded.

MAJOR AFFECTIVE DISORDERS*
The essential feature is an illness involving either a manic episode (see below)
or a major depressive episode (p. 210). These major affective episodes are not
diagnosed if the affective disturbance is due to an Organic Mental Disorder or
if it is superimposed on Schizophrenia.

Manic Episode
The essential feature is a distinct period when the predominant mood is either
elevated, expansive, or irritable and when there are associated symptoms of the
manic syndrome. These symptoms include hyperactivity, pressure of speech,
flight of ideas, inflated self-esteem, decreased need for sleep, distractibility, and
excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful conse-
quences, which is not recognized.
    The elevated mood may be described as euphoric, unusually good, cheerful,
or high; often has an infectious quality for the uninvolved observer; but is
recognized as excessive by those who know the individual well. The expansive
quality of the mood disturbance is characterized by unceasing and unselective
enthusiasm for interacting with people and seeking involvement with other
aspects of the environment. Although elevated mood is considered the proto-
typical symptom, the predominant mood disturbance may be irritability, which
may be most apparent when the individual is thwarted.
    The hyperactivity often involves excessive planning of and participation in
multiple activities (e.g., sexual, occupational, political, religious). Almost invari-
ably there is increased sociability, which includes efforts to renew old acquaint-
anceships and calling friends at all hours of the night. The intrusive, domineer-
ing, and demanding nature of these interactions is not recognized by the indi-
vidual. Frequently, expansiveness, unwarranted optimism, grandiosity, and lack
of judgment lead to such activities as buying sprees, reckless driving, foolish
business investments, and sexual behavior unusual for the individual. Often the
activities have a disorganized, flamboyant, or bizarre quality, for example, dress-
ing in colorful or strange garments, wearing excessive, poorly applied make-up,
or distributing candy, money, or advice to passing strangers.
    Manic speech is typically loud, rapid, and difficult to interrupt. Often it is

* The organization of the text for the Major Affective Disorders departs from the usual method of
 presentation in order to avoid redundancy. The essential features, associated features, differential
diagnosis and diagnostic criteria of manic and major depressive episodes are described first. Age at
 onset, course and other features of both manic and major depressive episodes are discussed next.
Finally, the diagnostic criteria for the specific Major Affective Disorders are listed.


                                             Affective Disorders 207

full of jokes, puns, plays on words, and amusing irrelevancies. It may become
theatrical, with dramatic mannerisms and singing. Sounds rather than meaning-
ful conceptual relationships may govern word choice (clanging). If the mood is
more irritable than expansive, there may be complaints, hostile comments, and
angry tirades.
    Frequently there is flight of ideas, i.e., a nearly continuous flow of acceler-
ated speech with abrupt changes from topic to topic, usually based on under-
standable associations, distracting stimuli, or plays on words. When flight of
ideas is severe, the speech may be disorganized and incoherent. However, loos-
ening of associations and incoherence may occur even when there is no flight
of ideas, particularly if the individual is on medication.
    Distractibility is usually present and manifests itself as rapid changes in
speech or activity as a result of responding to various irrelevant external stimuli,
such as background noise or signs or pictures on the wall.
    Characteristically, there is inflated self-esteem, ranging from uncritical self-
confidence to marked grandiosity, which may be delusional. For instance, advice
may be given on matters about which the individual has no special knowledge,
such as how to run a mental hospital or the United Nations. Despite a lack of
any particular talent, a novel may be started, music composed, or publicity
sought for some impractical invention. Grandiose delusions involving a special
relationship to God or some well-known figure from the political, religious, or
entertainment world are common.
    Almost invariably there is a decreased need for sleep; the individual awak-
ens several hours before the usual time, full of energy. When the sleep distur-
bance is severe, the individual may go for days without any sleep at all and yet
not feel tired.
    The term "hypomania" is used to describe a clinical syndrome that is
similar to, but not as severe as, that described by the term "mania" or "manic
episode/'

    Associated features. A common associated feature is lability of mood, with
rapid shifts to anger or depression. The depression, expressed by tearfulness,
suicidal threats, or other depressive symptoms, may last moments, hours, or,
more rarely, days. Occasionally the depressive and manic symptoms intermingle,
occurring at the same time; or they may alternate rapidly within a few days.
Less often, in Bipolar Disorder, Mixed, the depressive symptoms are more
prominent and last at least a full day, and there is the full symptom picture of
manic and major depressive episodes.
    When delusions or hallucinations are present, their content is usually
clearly consistent with the predominant mood (mood-congruent). God's voice
may be heard explaining that the individual has a special mission. Persecutory
delusions may be based on the idea that the individual is being persecuted
because of some special relationship or attribute. Less commonly, the content of
the hallucinations or delusions has no apparent relationship to the predominant
mood (mood-incongruent). The usefulness of the distinction between mood-
congruent and mood-incongruent psychotic features is controversial.


208 Diagnostic Categories

    Differential diagnosis of manic episode. Organic Affective Syndromes with
mania may be due to such substances as amphetamines or steroids, or to some
other known organic factor, such as multiple sclerosis. The diagnosis of a manic
episode should be made only if a known organic etiology can be excluded. For
further discussion, see p. 117.
    In Schizophrenia, Paranoid Type, there may be irritability and anger that
are difficult to distinguish from similar features in a manic episode. In such
instances it may be necessary to rely on features that, on a statistical basis, are
associated differentially with the two conditions. For example, the diagnosis of
a manic episode is more likely if there is a family history of Affective Disorder,
good premorbid adjustment, and a previous episode of an Affective Disorder
from which there was complete recovery.
    The diagnosis Schizoaffective Disorder may be made whenever the clinician
is unable to make a differential diagnosis between manic episode and Schizo-
phrenia. Although no criteria for Schizoaffective Disorder are provided in this
manual, several examples of clinical situations in which this diagnosis might be
appropriate are given on p. 202.
    In Cyclothymic Disorder there are hypomanic periods, but the full manic
syndrome is not present. However, in some instances a manic episode may be
superimposed on Cyclothymic Disorder. In such cases both Bipolar Disorder
and Cyclothymic Disorder should be diagnosed, since it is likely that when
the individual recovers from the manic episode, the Cyclothymic Disorder will
persist.

  Diagnostic criteria for a manic episode
  A, One or more distinct periods with a predominantly elevated, ex-
  pansive, or irritable mood. The elevated or irritable mood must be a
  prominent part of the illness and relatively persistent, although it may
  alternate or intermingle with depressive mood.

  B. Duration of at least one week (or any duration if hospitalJzation Is
  necessary), during which, for most of the time, at least three of the fol-
  lowing symptoms have persisted (four if the mood is only irritable) and
  have been present to a significant degree:

      (1) increase in activity (either socially, at work, or sexually) or physi-
      cal restlessness
      (2) more talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking
      (3) flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing
      (4) inflated self-esteem (grandiosity, which may be delusional)
      (5) decreased need for sleep
      (6) distractibility, i«ev attention is too easily drawn to unimportant or
      irrelevant external stimuli
      (7) excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for
      painful consequences which is not recognized, e.g., buying sprees,
      +sexual indiscretions, foolish business investments, reckless driving


                                            Affective Disorders 209

 C. Neither of the following dominates the clinical picture when an affec-
 tive syndrome is absent (i.e., symptoms in criteria A and B above):

     (1) preoccupation with a mood-incongruent delusion or hallucina-
     tion (see definition below)
     (2) bizarre behavior

 D. Not superimposed on either Schizophrenia, Schizophreniform Dis-
 order, or a Paranoid Disorder.

 E. Not due to any Organic Mental Disorder, such as Substance Intoxica-
 tion,

     (Note: A hypomanic episode is a pathological disturbance similar
     to, but not as severe as, a manic episode.)

 Fifth-digit code numbers and criteria for subclassification of manic episode
 6- In Remission. This fifth-digit category should be used when in the
 past the individual met the full Criteria for a manic episode but now is
 essentially free of manic symptoms or has some signs of the disorder but
does not meet the full criteria. The differentiation of this diagnosis from
 no mental disorder requires consideration of the period of time since the
fast episode, the number of previous episodes, and the need for con-
tinued evaluation or prophylactic treatment.

4- With Psychotic Features. This fifth-digit category should be used
when there apparently is gross impairment in reality.testing, as when
there are delusions or hallucinations or grossly bizarre behavior. When
possible, specify whether the psychotic features are mood-incongruent
(The non~lCD-9-CM fifth-digit 7 may be used instead to indicate that the
psychotic features are mood-incongruent; otherwise, mood-congruence
may be assumed.)

    Mood-congruent Psychotic Features: Delusions or hallucinations
    whose content is entirely consistent with the themes of inflated
    worth, power, knowledge, identity, or special relationship to a deity
    or famous person; flight of ideas without apparent awareness by
    the individual that the speech is not understandable.

    Mood-incongruent Psychotic Features: Either (a) or (b):
    (a) Delusions or hallucinations whose content does not involve
    themes of either inflated worth, power, knowledge, identity, or spe-
    cial relationship to a deity or famous person. Included are such symp-
    toms as persecutory delusions, thought insertion, and delusions of
    being controlled, whose content has no apparent relationship to any
    of the themes noted above.


210 Diagnostic Categories

      (b) Any of the following catatonic symptoms: stupor, mutism, nega-
      tivism, posturing.

  2- Without Psychotic Features. Meets the criteria for manic episode,
  but no psychotic features are present

  0- Unspecified.

Major Depressive Episode
The essential feature is either a dysphoric mood, usually depression, or loss of
interest or pleasure in all or almost all usual activities and pastimes. This
disturbance is prominent, relatively persistent, and associated with other symp-
toms of the depressive syndrome. These symptoms include appetite disturbance,
change in weight, sleep disturbance, psychomotor agitation or retardation,
decreased energy, feelings of worthlessness or guilt, difficulty concentrating or
thinking, and thoughts of death or suicide or suicidal attempts.
    An individual with a depressive syndrome will usually describe his or her
mood as depressed, sad, hopeless, discouraged, down in the dumps, or in terms
of some other colloquial variant. Sometimes, however, the mood disturbance
may not be expressed as a synonym for depressive mood but rather as a
complaint of "not caring anymore," or as a painful inability to experience
pleasure. In a child with a depressive syndrome there may not be complaints
of any dysphoric mood, but its existence may be inferred from a persistently
sad facial expression.
    Loss of interest or pleasure is probably always present in a major depres-
sive episode to some degree, but the individual may not complain of this or
even be aware of the loss, although family members may notice it. Withdrawal
from friends and family and neglect of avocations that were previously a
source of pleasure are common.
    Appetite is frequently disturbed, usually with loss of appetite, but occa-
sionally with increased appetite. When loss of appetite is severe, there may be
significant weight loss or, in the case of children, failure to make expected
weight gains. When appetite is markedly increased there may be significant
weight gain.
    Sleep is commonly disturbed, more frequently with insomnia present, but
sometimes with hypersomnia. The insomnia may involve difficulty falling asleep
(initial insomnia), waking up during sleep and then returning to sleep only with
difficulty (middle insomnia), or early morning awakening (terminal insomnia).
    Psychomotor agitation takes the form of inability to sit still, pacing, hand-
wringing, pulling or rubbing of hair, skin, clothing, or other objects, outbursts
of complaining or shouting, or pressure of speech. Psychomotor retardation may
take the form of slowed speech, increased pauses before answering, low or
monotonous speech, slowed body movements, a markedly decreased amount of
speech (poverty of speech), or muteness. (In children there may be hypoactivity
rather than psychomotor retardation.) A decrease in energy level is almost


                                             Affective Disorders 211

invariably present, and is experienced as sustained fatigue even in the absence
of physical exertion. The smallest task may seem difficult or impossible to
accomplish.
    The sense of worthlessness varies from feelings of inadequacy to com-
pletely unrealistic negative evaluations of one's worth. The individual may
reproach himself or herself for minor failings that are exaggerated and search
the environment for cues confirming the negative self-evaluation. Guilt may be
expressed as an excessive reaction to either current or past failings or as exag-
gerated responsibility for some untoward or tragic event. The sense of worth-
lessness or guilt may be of delusional proportions.
    Difficulty in concentrating, slowed thinking, and indecisiveness are fre-
quent. The individual may complain of memory difficulty and appear easily
distracted.
  Thoughts of death or suicide are common. There may be fear of dying, the
belief that the individual or others would be better off dead, wishes to die, or
suicidal plans or attempts.

    Associated features. Common associated features include depressed appear-
ance, tearfulness, feelings of anxiety, irritability, fear, brooding, excessive con-
cern with physical health, panic attacks, and phobias.
    When delusions or hallucinations are present, their content is usually
clearly consistent with the predominant mood (mood-congruent). A common
delusion is that one is being persecuted because of sinfulness or some inade-
quacy. There may be nihilistic delusions of world or personal destruction,
somatic delusions of cancer or other serious illness, or delusions of poverty.
Hallucinations, when present, are usually transient and not elaborate, and may
involve voices that berate the individual for his or her shortcomings or sins.
    Less commonly the content of the hallucinations or delusions has no
apparent relationship to the mood disturbance (mood-incongruent). This is
particularly the case with persecutory delusions, in which the individual may be
at a loss to explain why he or she should be the object of persecution. The
usefulness of the distinction between mood-congruent and mood-incongruent
psychotic features is controversial.

    Age-specific associated features. Although the essential features of a major
depressive episode are similar in infants, children, adolescents, and adults, there
are differences in the associated features.
    In prepubertal children separation anxiety may develop and cause the child
to cling, to refuse to go to school, and to fear that he or she or the parents will
die. A previous history of separation anxiety may result in more intense anxiety
symptoms with the onset of a major depressive episode.
    In adolescent boys negativistic or frankly antisocial behavior may appear.
Feelings of wanting to leave home or of not being understood and approved of,
restlessness, grouchiness, and aggression are common. Sulkiness, a reluctance
to cooperate in family ventures, and withdrawal from social activities, with
retreat to one's room, are frequent. School difficulties are likely. There may be


 212 Diagnostic Categories

inattention to personal appearance and increased emotionality, with particular
sensitivity to rejection in love relationships. Substance Abuse may develop.
    In elderly adults there may be symptoms suggesting Dementia, such as dis-
orientation, memory loss, and distractibility. Loss of interest or pleasure in the
individual's usual activities may appear as apathy; difficulty in concentration as
inattentiveness. These symptoms make the differential diagnosis of "pseudo-
dementia" (due to depression) from true Dementia (an Organic Mental Dis-
order) particularly difficult (p. 111).

    Differential diagnosis of major depressive episode. An Organic Affective
Syndrome with depression may be due to substances such as reserpine, to
infectious diseases such as influenza, or to hypothyroidism. Only by excluding
organic etiology can one make the diagnosis of a major depressive episode. For
further discussion, see p. 117.
    Primary Degenerative Dementia or Multi-infarct Dementia, because of the
presence of disorientation, apathy, and complaints of difficulty concentrating or
of memory loss, may be difficult to distinguish from a major depressive episode
occurring in the elderly. If the features suggesting a major depressive episode
 are at least as prominent as those suggesting Dementia, it is best to diagnose a
 major depressive episode and assume that the features suggesting Dementia
represent a pseudo-dementia that is a manifestation of the major depressive
 episode. In such cases the successful treatment of the major depressive episode
 often results in the disappearance of the symptoms suggesting Dementia. If the
 features suggesting Dementia are more prominent than the depressive features,
 the diagnosis should be the appropriate form of Dementia, but the presence of
depressive features should be noted.
     If a psychological reaction to the functional impairment associated with a
 physical illness that does not involve the central nervous system causes a de-
 pression that meets the full criteria for a major depressive episode, the Major
 Depression should be recorded on Axis I, the physical disorder on Axis III, and
 the severity of the psychosocial stressor on Axis IV. Examples would include
 the psychological reaction to the amputation of a leg or to the development of
 a life-threatening or incapacitating illness.
     In Schizophrenia there is usually considerable depressive symptomatology.
 If an episode of depression follows an episode of Schizophrenia and is super-
 imposed upon the residual phase of Schizophrenia, the additional diagnosis of
 either Atypical Depression or Adjustment Disorder with Depressed Mood may
 be made, but not Major Depression. An individual with a major depressive
 episode may have psychotic symptoms; however, the diagnosis of Schizophrenia
 is made in the presence of a full depressive syndrome only if the affective
 symptoms follow the psychotic symptoms or are brief relative to the duration
 of the psychotic symptoms. An individual with Schizophrenia, Catatonic Type,
 may appear to be withdrawn and depressed, and it may be difficult to dis-
 tinguish this condition from Major Depression with psychomotor retardation.
 In such instances it may be necessary to rely on features that on a statistical
 basis are associated differentially with the two disorders. For example, the
 diagnosis of a major depressive episode is more likely if there is a family history


                                              Affective Disorders 213

 of Affective Disorder, good premorbid adjustment, and a previous episode of
 affective disturbance from which there was complete recovery.
     The diagnosis of Schizoaffective Disorder can be made whenever the clin-
 ician is unable to make a differential diagnosis between a major depressive
 episode and Schizophrenia. Although no criteria for Schizoaffective Disorder
 are provided in this manual, several examples of clinical situations in which
 this diagnosis might be appropriate are given on p. 202.
     In Dysthymic and Cyclothymic Disorders there are features of the depres-
 sive syndrome, but they are not of sufficient severity and duration to meet the
 criteria for a major depressive episode. However, in some instances, a major
 depressive episode is superimposed on one of these disorders. In such cases
both diagnoses should be recorded, since it is likely that after recovering from
the major depressive episode, either a Dysthymic or a Cyclothymic Disorder
will persist.
    Chronic mental disorders, such as Obsessive Compulsive Disorder or Alco-
hol Dependence, when associated with depressive symptoms, may suggest a
Major Depression. The additional diagnosis of Major Depression should be
made only if the full depressive syndrome is present and persistent. In such
instances both the chronic mental disorder and the superimposed Major Depres-
sion should be recorded.
    In Separation Anxiety Disorder, depressive symptoms are common, but if
the full depressive syndrome is not present, only Separation Anxiety Disorder
should be diagnosed. On the other hand, children with Separation Anxiety
Disorder may develop a superimposed major depressive episode, in which case
both diagnoses should be made.
    Uncomplicated Bereavement is distinguished from a major depressive epi-
sode and is not considered a mental disorder even when associated with the full
depressive syndrome (see p. 333). However, if bereavement is unduly severe or
prolonged, the diagnosis may be changed to Major Depression.

  Diagnostic criteria for major depressive episode
  A. Dysphoric mood or loss of interest or pleasure in all or almost ail usual
  activities and pastimes. The dysphoric mood is characterized by symptoms
  such as the following: depressed, sad,, blue, hopeless, low, down in the
  dumps, irritable. The mood disturbance must be prominent and relatively
  persistent, but not necessarily the most dominant symptom, and does not
  include momentary shifts from one dysphoric mood to another dysphoric
  mood, e.g., anxiety to depression to anger, such as are seen in states of
  acute psychotic turmoil. (For children under six, dysphoric mood may
  have to be inferred from a persistently sad facial expression.)

  B. At least four of the following symptoms have each been present
  nearly every day for a period of at least two weeks (in children under
  six, at least three of the first four).


+214 Diagnostic Categories

      (1) poor appetite or significant weight loss (when not dieting) or
      increased appetite or significant weight gain {in children under
      six, consider failure to make expected weight gains)
      (2) insomnia or hypersomnia
      (3) psychomotor agitation or retardation (but not merely subjective
      feelings of restlessness or being slowed down) (in children under six,
      hypoactivity)
      (4) loss of interest or pleasure in usual activities, or decrease in
      sexual drive not limited to a period when delusional or hallucinating
      (In children under six, signs of apathy)
      (5) loss of energy; fatigue
      (6) feelings of worthlessness, self-reproach, or excessive or inap-
      propriate guilt (either may be delusional)
      (7) complaints or evidence of diminished ability to think or con-
      centrate, such as slowed thinking, or indecisiveness not associated
      with marked loosening of associations or incoherence
      (8) recurrent thoughts of death, suicidal ideation, wishes to be dead,
      or suicide attempt

  C. Neither of the following dominate the clinical picture when an affec-
  tive syndrome is absent (i.e., symptoms in criteria A and B above):

      (1) preoccupation with a mood-incongruent delusion or hallucina-
      tion (see definition below)
      (2) bizarre behavior

  D. Not superimposed on either Schizophrenia, Schizophreniform Dis-
  order, or a Paranoid Disorder.

  L Not due to any Organic Mental Disorder or Uncomplicated Bereave-
  ment

  Fifth-digit code numbers and criteria for subclassification of major
  depressive episode
  (When psychotic features and Melancholia are present the coding sys-
  tem requires that the clinician record the single most clinically significant
  characteristic.)

  6- In Remission. This fifth-digit category should be used when in the
  past the individual met the full criteria for a major depressive episode but
  now is essentially free of depressive symptoms or has some signs of the
  disorder but does not meet the full criteria.

  4- With Psychotic Features, This fifth-digit category should be used
  when there apparently is gross impairment in reality testing, as when
  there are delusions or hallucinations, or depressive stupor (the individual


                                              Affective Disorders 215

   is mute and ynresponsive). When possible, specify whether the psychotic
   features are mood-congruent or moocNncongruent. (The non~ICD*9-CM
   fifth-digit 7 may be used instead to indicate that the psychotic features
   are mood-incongruent; otherwise, mood-congruence may be assumed,}

       Mood-congruent Psychotic Features. Delusions or hallucinations
       whose content is entirely consistent with the themes of either per-
       sonal inadequacy, guilt, disease, death, nihilism, or deserved punish-
       ment; depressive stupor (the individual rs mute tad unresponsive),

       Mood-incongruent Psychic: features. Delusions or hallucinations
       whose content does not involve themes of either personal inade-
       quacy, guilt, disease, death/nihHlsm, or deserved punishment In-
       cluded here are such symptoms as ptersecutory delusions, thought
       insertion, thought broadcasting) and delusions of control, whose
       content has no apparent relationship to any 61 the themes noted
       above.

   3- With Melancholia, loss of pleasure in all or almost all activities, lack
   of reactivity to usually pleasurable stimuli (doesn't fete! much better, evert
   temporarily, when something good happens), and at least three 0f the
   following:
       (a) distinct quality of depressed mood, i.e., the depressed mood Is
       perceived as distinctly different from the kind of feeling experi-
       enced following the death of a loved one
       (&) the depression is regularly worse In the morning
       (c) early morning awakening (at least two hours before usual time of
       awakening)
       (d) marked psychomotor retardation or agitation
       (e) sigiMlicant anorexia or weight loss
       (r) excessive or inappropriate guilt

  2- Without Melancholia

  0000

OTHER FEATURES OF BOTH MANIC AND MAJOR DEPRESSIVE EPISODES

    Age at onset. The first manic episode of Bipolar Disorder typically occurs
before age 30. Major Depression may begin at any age, including infancy, and
the age at onset is fairly evenly distributed throughout adult life.

    Course. Manic episodes typically begin suddenly, with a rapid escalation of
symptoms over a few days. The episodes usually last from a few days to
months and are briefer and end more abruptly than major depressive episodes.


216 Diagnostic Categories

Most individuals who have a disorder characterized by one or more manic
episodes (Bipolar Disorder) will eventually have a major depressive episode.
    The onset of a major depressive episode is variable, the symptoms usually
developing over a period of days to weeks; but in some cases it may be sudden
(e.g., when associated with a severe psychosocial stress). In some instances
prodromal symptoms—e.g., generalized anxiety, panic attacks, phobias, or mild
depressive symptoms—may occur over a period of several months. It is esti-
mated that over 50% of individuals with a Major Depression, Single Episode,
will eventually have another major depressive episode, thus meeting the criteria
for Major Depression, Recurrent. Individuals with Major Depression, Recurrent,
are at greater risk of developing Bipolar Disorder than are those with a single
episode of Major Depression.
    In Bipolar Disorder the initial episode is often manic. Both the manic and
the major depressive episodes are more frequent and shorter than the major
depressive episodes in Major Depression. Frequently a manic or major depressive
episode is immediately followed by a short episode of the other kind. In rare
cases, over long periods of time there is an alternation of the two kinds of
episodes without an intervening period of normal mood (cycling).
    The course of Major Affective Disorders is variable. Some individuals have
episodes separated by many years of normal functioning; others have clusters
of episodes; and still others have an increased frequency of episodes as they
grow older. Usually functioning returns to the premorbid level between epi-
 sodes. However, in 20% to 35% of cases there is a chronic course with con-
 siderable residual symptomatic and social impairment. This is more likely when
there are frequent recurrent episodes.

    Impairment. In manic episodes there are usually considerable impairment
 in both social and occupational functioning and a need for protection from the
 consequences of poor judgment or hyperactivity.
     In major depressive episodes the degree of impairment varies, but there is
 always some interference in social and occupational functioning. If impairment
 is severe, the individual may be totally unable to function socially or occupa-
 tionally, or even to feed or clothe himself or herself or maintain minimal per-
 sonal hygiene.

     Complications. The most common complications of a manic episode are
 Substance Abuse and the consequences of actions resulting from impaired judg-
 ment, such as financial losses and illegal activities.
     The most serious complication of a major depressive episode is suicide.

     Predisposing factors. Chronic physical illness, Alcohol Dependence, Cyclo-
 thymic and Dysthymic Disorders apparently predispose to the development of
 a Major Affective Disorder.
     Frequently an episode of Major Affective Disorder follows a psychosocial
 stressor. If an individual has recurrent episodes, however, subsequent episodes
 may occur apparently without precipitating factors.


                                              Affective Disorders 217

     Prevalence and sex ratio. Studies in Europe and in the United States indi-
 cate that in the adult population, approximately 18% to 23% of the females
 and 8% to 11% of the males have at some time had a major depressive episode.
 It is estimated that 6% of the females and 3% of the males have had a major
 depressive episode sufficiently severe to require hospitalization.
     It is estimated that from 0.4% to 1.2% of the adult population have had
 Bipolar Disorder. In contrast to Major Depression, Bipolar Disorder is appar-
 ently equally common in women and in men.

     Familial pattern. Major Affective Disorders are more common among family
 members than in the general population. This is particularly true for family
members of individuals with Bipolar Disorder.

DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR MAJOR AFFECTIVE DISORDERS
BIPOLAR DISORDER

296.6x Bipolar Disorder, Mixed

  Diagnostic criteria lor Bipolar Disorder, Mixed
  Use fifth-digit coding for manic episode.

  A. Current (or most recent) episode involves the full symptomatic pic-
  ture of both manic and major depressive episodes (p. 208 and p. 213),
  intermixed or rapidly alternating every few days,

   B. Depressive symptoms are prominent and last at least a full day.

296.4x Bipolar Disorder, Manic

  Diagnostic criteria for Bipolar Disorder, Manic
      Currently (or most recently) in a manic episode (p. 208). (If there
      has been a previous manic episode, the current episode need not
      meet the full criteria for a manic episode.)

296.5x Bipolar Disorder, Depressed

  Diagnostic criteria for Bipolar Disorder, Depressed

  A. Has had one or more manic episodes (p. 208),

  8. Currently (or most recently) in a major depressive episode (p. 213).
  (If there has been a previous major depressive episode, the current epi-
  sode of depression need not meet the full criteria for a major depres-
  sive episode.)


218 Diagnostic Categories

MAJOR DEPRESSION

296.2x Major Depression, Single Episode

296.3x Major Depression, Recurrent

  Diagnostic criteria for Major Depression
  A, One or more major depressive episodes (p. 213).

  B. Has never had a manic episode (p. 208).


OTHER SPECIFIC AFFECTIVE DISORDERS
The essential feature is a long-standing illness of at least two years' duration,
with either sustained or intermittent disturbance in mood, and associated symp-
toms. A full affective syndrome is not present, and there are no psychotic
features. These disorders usually begin in early adult life, without a clear onset.
This category contains two disorders: Cyclothymic Disorder and Dysthymic
Disorder. Other terms for these disorders are Cyclothymic and Depressive Per-
sonality Disorders.

301.13 Cyclothymic Disorder
The essential feature is a chronic mood disturbance of at least two years' dura-
tion, involving numerous periods of depression and hypomania, but not of suffi-
cient severity and duration to meet the criteria for a major depressive or a manic
episode (full affective syndrome).
    The depressive periods and hypomanic periods may be separated by periods
of normal mood lasting as long as several months at a time. In other cases the
two types of periods are intermixed or alternate.
    During the affective periods there are signs of depression (depressed mood
or loss of interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, usual activities and pastimes)
and hypomania. In addition, during the affective periods there are paired sets of
symptoms (see criterion C below). The following pairs of symptoms are partic-
ularly common: feelings of inadequacy (during depressed periods) and inflated
self-esteem (during hypomanic periods); social withdrawal and uninhibited peo-
ple-seeking; sleeping too much and decreased need for sleep; diminished produc-
tivity at work and increased productivity, often associated with unusual and
self-imposed working hours; decreased attention or concentration and sharpened
and unusually creative thinking.

    Associated features. Associated features are similar to those of manic epi-
sode (p. 207) and major depressive episode (p. 211) except that by definition
there are no psychotic features such as delusions, hallucinations, incoherence, or
loosening of associations. Substance Abuse is particularly common as a result of


                                              Affective Disorders 219

 self-treatment with sedatives and alcohol during the depressed periods and the
 self-indulgent use of stimulants and psychedelics during the hypomanic periods.

     Age at onset. Usually early adult life.

     Course. The disorder usually begins without clear onset and has a chronic
 course.

     Impairment. Impairment in social and occupational functioning is usually
 moderate or severe.

     Complications. See manic and major depressive episodes (p. 216). Frequently
 manic and major depressive episodes are complications of this disorder. For this
 reason some investigators believe that Cyclothymic Disorder is a mild form of
 Bipolar Disorder.

    Predisposing factors. No information.

    Prevalence. This disorder was previously assumed to be rare. Recent evi-
 dence suggests that among outpatients the disorder may be relatively common,
 the depressive and hypomanic periods being manifested by loss of interest or
 pleasure and an expansive or irritable mood rather than by acknowledged de-
pressed and elevated moods.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is apparently more common in females.

    Familial pattern. Major Depression and Bipolar Disorder are more common
among family members of individuals with Cyclothymic Disorder than in the
general population.

    Differential diagnosis. See manic (p. 208) and major depressive episodes
 (p. 213). When a major depressive or manic episode is superimposed on Cyclo-
thymic Disorder, both diagnoses should be made because it is likely that the in-
dividual will continue to have Cyclothymic Disorder after recovery from the
Major Affective Disorder.

  Diagnostic criteria for Cyclothymic Disorder
  A. During the past two years, numerous periods during which some
  symptoms characteristic of both the depressive and the mmi£ syn-
  dromes were present, but were not of sufficient severity and duration
  to meet the criteria for a major depressive or manic episode.

  B, The depressive periods and hypomanic periods may Ibe separated toy
  periods of normal mood lasting as bng as months at a time, to^ may be
  intermixed, or they may alternate.


220 Diagnostic Categories

  C During depressive periods     During hypomanic periods there is
  there is depressed mood or loss of an elevated, expansive, or irritable
  interest or pleasure in all or al- mood and at least three of the fol-
  most all, usual activities and pas- lowing:
  times, and at least three of the
  following:

      (1) insomnia or hypersomnia (1) decreased need for sleep
      (2) low energy or chronic   (2) more energy than usual
      fatigue
      (3) feelings of inadequacy  (3) inflated self-esteem
      (4) decreased effectiveness (4) increased productivity, often as-
      or productivity at school,  sociated with unusual and self-im-
      work, or home               posed working hours
      (5) decreased attention, con- (5) sharpened and unusually crea-
      centration, or ability to think tive thinking
      clearly
      (6) social withdrawal       (6) uninhibited people-seeking (ex-
                                  treme gregariousness)
      (7) loss of interest in or  (7) hypersexuality without recogni-
      enjoyment of sex            tion of possibility of painful conse-
                                  quences
      (8) restriction of involvement (8) excessive involvement in pleasur-
      in pleasurable activities;  able activities with lack of concern
      guilt over past activities  for the high potential for painful
                                  consequences, e.g., buying sprees,
                                 foolish business investments, reckless
                                 driving
      (9) feeling slowed down     (9) physical restlessness
      (10) less talkative than usual (10) more talkative than usual
      (11) pessimistic attitude   (11) overoptimism or exaggeration
      toward the future, or brood- of past achievements
      ing about past events
      (12) tearfulness or crying  (12) inappropriate laughing, joking,
                                  punning

  D. Absence of psychotic features such as delusions, hallucinations, in-
  coherence, or loosening of associations.

  E, Not due to any other mental disorder, such as partial remission of
  Bipolar Disorder. However, Cyclothymic Disorder may precede Bipolar
  Disorder.

300.40 Dysthymic Disorder (or Depressive Neurosis)
The essential feature is a chronic disturbance of mood involving either depressed
mood or loss of interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, usual activities and


                                             Affective Disorders 221

pastimes, and associated symptoms, but not of sufficient severity and duration
to meet the criteria for a major depressive episode (full affective syndrome).
    For adults, two years' duration is required; for children and adolescents, one
year is sufficient.
    The depressed mood may be characterized by the individual as feeling sad,
blue, down in the dumps, or low. The depressed mood or loss of interest or
pleasure may be either relatively persistent or intermittent and separated by pe-
riods of normal mood, interest, and pleasure. These normal periods may last a
few days to a few weeks. The diagnosis should not be made if an apparently
chronic course has been interrupted by a period of normal mood lasting more
than a few months.
    During the depressive periods there are some of the milder features of the
depressive syndrome described as part of a major depressive episode on p. 210
(see criterion D below).

    Associated features. Associated features (and age-specific associated fea-
tures) are similar to those of major depressive episode (p. 211), except that by
definition there are no delusions or hallucinations.
    Often an associated personality disturbance warrants an additional diagno-
sis of a Personality Disorder on Axis II.

    Age at onset. This disorder usually begins early in adult life, and for this
reason was often referred to as Depressive Personality. Although it may begin
in childhood or adolescence, in other cases it may begin at a period later in adult-
hood, in some instances following a Major Depression.

    Course. The disorder usually begins without clear onset and has a chronic
course.

    Impairment and complications. The impairment in social and occupational
functioning is usually mild or moderate because of the chronicity rather than the
severity of the depressive syndrome. Therefore, hospitalization is rarely required
unless there is a suicide attempt or a superimposed Major Affective Disorder.
The complications are similar to those of Major Depression, although, because
of the chronicity of this disorder, there may be a greater likelihood of develop-
ing Substance Abuse.
    In children and adolescents social interaction with peers and adults is fre-
quently affected. Children with depression often react negatively or shyly to
praise and frequently respond to positive relationships with negative behaviors
(sometimes testing, sometimes as manifestations of unexpressed resentment and
anger). School performance and progress may be deleteriously affected.

    Predisposing factors. Predisposing factors include chronic physical disorder,
chronic psychosocial stressors, and another mental disorder, such as a Personal-
ity Disorder or an Affective Disorder that does not completely remit and merges
imperceptibly into this condition.


222 Diagnostic Categories

    In children and adolescents predisposing factors are the presence of Atten-
tion Deficit Disorder, Conduct Disorder, Mental Retardation, a severe Spe-
cific Developmental Disorder or an inadequate, disorganized, rejecting and cha-
otic environment.

    Prevalence. This disorder is apparently common.

    Sex ratio. Among adults the disorder is apparently more common in females.
In children it seems to occur equally frequently in both sexes.

    Familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. For a discussion of the differential diagnosis with
major depressive episode, see p. 213.
    When a Major Depression is in partial remission for a period of two years,
Dysthymic Disorder should be considered as an alternative diagnosis to Major
Depression in Remission. When a Major Depression is superimposed on Dys-
thymic Disorder, both diagnoses should be recorded since it is likely that the
individual will continue to have the Dysthymic Disorder when he or she has
recovered from the Major Depression.
    Often the affective features of this disorder are viewed as secondary to an
underlying Personality Disorder. When an individual meets the criteria for both
this disorder and a Personality Disorder, both diagnoses should be made regard-
less of the causal relationship between the two. This disorder is particularly
common in individuals with Borderline, Histrionic and Dependent Personality
Disorders.
    Normal fluctuations of mood are not as frequent or severe as the depressed
mood in Dysthymic Disorder and there is no interference with social functioning.
    Chronic mental disorders such as Obsessive Compulsive Disorder or Alco-
hol Dependence, when associated with depressive symptoms may suggest Dys-
thymic Disorder. The additional diagnosis of Dysthymic Disorder should be
made only if the depressed mood, by virtue of its intensity or effect on function-
ing, can be clearly distinguished from the individual's usual mood. In children
Dysthymic Disorder may be superimposed on Attention Deficit Disorder, a Spe-
cific Developmental Disorder, or an Organic Mental Disorder.

  Diagnostic criteria for Dysthymic Disorder
  A, During the past two years lor one year for children and adolescents)
  the individual has been bothered most or all of the time by symptoms
  characteristic of the depressive syndrome but that are not of sufficient
  severity and duration to meet the criteria for a major depressive episode.

  B. The manifestations of the depressive syndrome may be relatively per-
  sistent or separated by periods of normal mood lasting a few days to a
  few weeks, but no more than a few months at a time.


                                              Affective Disorders 223

   C During the depressive periods there is either prominent depressed
   mood (e,g^ sad, blue, down in the dumps, low) or marked loss of interest
   or pleasure in all, or almost all, usual activities and pastimes.

   0. Dyrtiig the depressive periods at least three of the following symp-
   toms are present:

      ; flj Insomnia or
       000000000000000
      . (3) feettegs of inadequacy^ tess 0£ self-esteem, or self-deprecation
       "":  (4)'"" dec'reised -'etfecpveniess ;oi.;|>Fod,itcfivity at school, -work, or ho
       (5) decreased j attention, /concentration or ability to think clearly
       (6) social witMfawal
       {7} foss of interest in or enjoyment' of pleasurable activities
       (8) irritability or excessive- anger fin children, expressed toward par-
       .. .. enis or... caretak
       (9) inability to respond with apparent pleasure to praise or rewards
      (10) less active or-lattetlV e 'than :-iisual, or feels slowed down or
      restless
      (11) pessimiitic attitude toward the future, brooding about past
      events/ or feeling, sotry for mil
      tearfwjnesi p'r crying "/" "" /" j"
      000000000000000000000000000000000000

   L Absence of piychotic tNltiW^suipk a$ delusions, hallucinations, or
   Incoherence, or loosening of association

   F. If the disturbance is superimposed oft a preexisting mental disorder,
   such as 0tof^fvfr-OpfRp&^e Disorder or Alchor or Alochol DepeDependence, the de-
   prelsed mood, by virtua of 'fe'.i»lensl%-oi Affect on functioning,, can be
   clearly- d lstin|ui§hed from- -tfie tntKviifcral^ usual '• mood. '

 ATYPICAL AFFECTIVE DISORDERS

 296.70 Atypical Bipolar Disorder
This is a residual category for individuals with manic features that cannot be
 classified as Bipolar Disorder or as Cyclothymic Disorder. For example, an in-
 dividual who previously had a major depressive episode and now has an episode
 of illness with some manic features (hypomanic episode), but not of sufficient
 severity and duration to meet the criteria for a manic episode. Such cases have
been referred to as "Bipolar II."

 296.82 Atypical Depression
This is a residual category for individuals with depressive symptoms who cannot
be diagnosed as having a Major or Other Specific Affective Disorder or Adjust-
ment Disorder. Examples include the following:


224 Diagnostic Categories

    (1) A distinct and sustained episode of the full depressive syndrome in an
        individual with Schizophrenia, Residual Type, that develops without an
        activation of the psychotic symptoms.
    (2) A disorder that fulfills the criteria for Dysthymic Disorder; however,
        there have been intermittent periods of normal mood lasting more than
        a few months.
    (3) A brief episode of depression that does not meet the criteria for a
        Major Affective Disorder and that is apparently not reactive to psycho-
        social stress, so that it cannot be classified as an Adjustment Disorder.


                                +Anxiety Disorders


In this group of disorders anxiety is either the predominant disturbance,
as in Panic Disorder and Generalized Anxiety Disorder, or anxiety is experienced
if the individual attempts to master the symptoms, as in confronting the dreaded
object or situation in a Phobic Disorder or resisting the obsessions or compul-
sions in Obsessive Compulsive Disorder. Diagnosis of an Anxiety Disorder is
not made if the anxiety is due to another disorder, such as Schizophrenia, an
Affective Disorder, or an Organic Mental Disorder.
    It has been estimated that from 2% to 4% of the general population has
at some time had a disorder that this manual would classify as an Anxiety Dis-
order.
    Panic Disorder, Phobic Disorders and Obsessive Compulsive Disorder are
each apparently more common among family members of individuals with each
of these disorders than in the general population.

PHOBIC DISORDERS (OR PHOBIC NEUROSES)
The essential feature is persistent and irrational fear of a specific object, activity,
or situation that results in a compelling desire to avoid the dreaded object,
activity, or situation (the phobic stimulus). The fear is recognized by the indi-
vidual as excessive or unreasonable in proportion to the actual dangerousness of
the object, activity, or situation.
    Irrational avoidance of objects, activities, or situations that has an in-
significant effect on life adjustment is commonplace. For example, many indi-
viduals experience some irrational fear when unable to avoid contact with
harmless insects or spiders, but this has no major effect on their lives. How-
ever, when the avoidance behavior or fear is a significant source of distress to
the individual or interferes with social or role functioning, a diagnosis of a
Phobic Disorder is warranted.
    The Phobic Disorders are subdivided into three types: Agoraphobia, the
most severe and pervasive form; Social Phobia; and Simple Phobia. Both Social
and Simple Phobias generally involve a circumscribed stimulus, but Simple
Phobia tends to have an earlier onset and better prognosis. When more than
one type is present, multiple diagnoses should be made.
    Although anxiety related to separation from parental figures is a form of
phobic reaction, it is classified as Separation Anxiety Disorder, in the section
Disorders Usually First Evident in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence (p. 50).
Similarly, phobic avoidance limited to sexual activities is classified as a Psycho-
sexual Disorder Not Elsewhere Classified (p. 282).
    Although Simple Phobia is the most common type of Phobic Disorder in

                                225


226 Diagnostic Categories

the general population/ Agoraphobia is the most common among those seeking
treatment.

300.21 Agoraphobia with Panic Attacks

300.22 Agoraphobia without Panic Attacks
The essential feature is a marked fear of being alone, or being in public
places from which escape might be difficult or help not available in case of
sudden incapacitation. Normal activities are increasingly constricted as the fears
or avoidance behavior dominate the individual's life. The most common situa-
tions avoided involve being in crowds, such as on a busy street or in crowded
stores, or being in tunnels, on bridges, on elevators, or on public transportation.
Often these individuals insist that a family member or friend accompany them
whenever they leave home.
    The disturbance is not due to a major depressive episode, Obsessive
Compulsive Disorder, Paranoid Personality Disorder, or Schizophrenia.
    Often the initial phase of the disorder consists of recurrent panic attacks.
(For a description of panic attacks, see p. 230.) The individual develops anticipa-
tory fear of having such an attack and becomes reluctant or refuses to enter a
variety of situations that are associated with these attacks. When there is a his-
tory of panic attacks (which may or may not be currently present) associated
with avoidance behavior, the diagnosis of Agoraphobia with Panic Attacks should
be made. Where there is no such history (or this information is lacking), the diag-
nosis of Agoraphobia without Panic Attacks should be made.

    Associated features. Depression, anxiety, rituals, minor "checking" com-
pulsions, or rumination is frequently present.

    Age at onset. Most frequently the onset is in the late teens or early 20s,
but it can be much later.

    Course. The severity of the disturbance waxes and wanes, and periods of
complete remission are possible. The activities or situations that the individual
dreads may change from day to day.

    Impairment. During exacerbations of the illness the individual may be
housebound. The avoidance of certain situations, such as being in elevators, may
grossly interfere with social and occupational functioning.

    Complications. Some individuals attempt to relieve their anxiety with
alcohol, barbiturates, or antianxiety medications even to the extent of becoming
physiologically dependent on them. Major Depression is another complication.

    Predisposing factors. Separation Anxiety Disorder in childhood and sudden
object loss apparently predispose to the development of Agoraphobia.

    Prevalence. A study of the general population in a small city found that
approximately 0.5% of the population had had Agoraphobia at some time.


                                               Anxiety Disorders 227

    Sex ratio. The disorder is more frequently diagnosed in women.

    Differential diagnosis. In Schizophrenia, Major Depression, Obsessive Com-
pulsive Disorder and Paranoid Personality Disorder there may be phobic avoid-
ance of certain situations. The diagnosis of Agoraphobia is not made if a phobia
is due to any of these disorders.

  Diagnostic criteria for Agoraphobia
  A. The individual has marked fear of and thus avoids being alone or m
  public places from which escape might be difficult or help not available
  in case of sudden incapacitation, e.g., crowds, tunnels, bridges, public
  transportation.

  B. There is increasing constriction of normal activities until the fears or
  avoidance behavior dominate the individual's life.

  C. Not due to a major depressive episode, Obsessive Compulsive Dis-
  order, Paranoid Personality Disorder, or Schizophrenia.

300.23 Social Phobia
The essential feature is a persistent, irrational fear of, and compelling de-
sire to avoid, situations in which the individual may be exposed to scrutiny by
others. There is also fear that the individual may behave in a manner that will be
humiliating or embarrassing. Marked anticipatory anxiety occurs if the individual
is confronted with the necessity of entering into such a situation, and he or she
therefore attempts to avoid it. The disturbance is a significant source of distress
and is recognized by the individual as excessive or unreasonable. It is not due to
any other mental disorder. Examples of Social Phobias are fears of speaking or
performing in public, using public lavatories, eating in public, and writing in
the presence of others. Generally an individual has only one Social Phobia.
    Usually the individual is aware that the fear is that others will detect signs
of anxiety in the phobic situation. For example, the individual with a fear of
writing in the presence of others is concerned that others may detect a hand
tremor. A vicious cycle may be created in which the irrational fear generates
anxiety that impairs performance, thus providing an apparent justification for
avoiding the phobic situation.

    Associated features. Considerable unfocused or generalized anxiety may
also be present. Agoraphobia or Simple Phobia may coexist with Social
Phobia.

    Age at onset. The disorder often begins in late childhood or early adoles-
cence.

    Course. The disorder is usually chronic, and may undergo exacerbation


 228 Diagnostic Categories

 when the anxiety impairs performance of the feared activity. This then leads
 to increased anxiety, which strengthens the phobic avoidance.

     Impairment. Unless the disorder is severe, it is rarely, in itself, incapacitat-
 ing. However, considerable inconvenience may result from the need to avoid the
 phobic situation, e.g., avoiding a trip if it would necessitate the use of a public
 lavatory. Fear of public speaking may interfere with professional advancement.

     Complications. Individuals with this disorder are prone to the episodic
 abuse of alcohol, barbiturates, and antianxiety medications, which they may use
 to relieve their anxiety.

     Prevalence. The disorder is apparently relatively rare.

     Predisposing factors, sex ratio, and familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. Avoidance of certain social situations that are nor-
 mally a source of some distress, which is common in many individuals with
 "normal" fear of public speaking, does not justify a diagnosis of Social Phobia.
 In Schizophrenia, Major Depression, Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, and Para-
noid and Avoidant Personality Disorders, there may be marked anxiety and
avoidance of certain social situations. However, the diagnosis of Social Phobia is
 not made if the phobia is due to any of these disorders.
    In Simple Phobia there is also a circumscribed phobic stimulus, but it is not
 a social situation involving the possibility of humiliation or embarrassment.

  Diagnostic criteria for Social Phobia
  A. A persistent, irrational fear of, and compelling desire to avoid, a situa-
  tion in which the individual is exposed to possible scrutiny by others and
  fears that he or she may act in a way that will be humiliating or embar-
  rassing.

  8. Significant distress because of the disturbance and recognition by the
  individual that his or her fear is excessive or unreasonable.

  C, Not due to another mental disorder, such as Major Depression or
  Avoidant Personality Disorder.

300.29 Simple Phobia
The essential feature is a persistent, irrational fear of, and compelling desire to
avoid, an object or a situation other than being alone or in public places away
from home (Agoraphobia), or of humiliation or embarrassment in certain social
situations (Social Phobia). Thus, this is a residual category of Phobic Disorder.
This disturbance is a significant source of distress, and the individual recognizes


                                               Anxiety Disorderss 22

 that his or her fear is excessive or unreasonable. The disturbance is not due to
 another mental disorder.
     Simple Phobias are sometimes referred to as "specific" phobias. The most
 common Simple Phobias in the general population, though not necessarily
 among those seeking treatment, involve animals, particularly dogs, snakes, in-
 sects, and mice. Other Simple Phobias are claustrophobia (fear of closed spaces)
 and acrophobia (fear of heights).

     Associated features. When suddenly exposed to the phobic stimulus, the
 individual becomes overwhelmingly fearful and may experience symptoms identi-
 cal with those of a panic attack (p. 230). Because of anticipatory anxiety, th
 individual will often try to gain considerable information before entering situa-
 tions in which the phobic stimulus may be encountered.

     Age at onset. Age at onset varies, but animal phobias nearly always begin
 in childhood.

     Course. Most simple phobias that start in childhood disappear without
 treatment. However, those that persist into adulthood rarely remit without
 treatment.

    Impairment. Impairment may be minimal if the phobic object is rare and
easily avoided, such as fear of snakes in someone living in the city. Impairment
may be considerable if the phobic object is common and cannot be avoided, such
as a fear of elevators in someone living in a large city who must use elevators
 at work.

    Complications and predisposing factors. No information.

    Prevalence. Simple Phobias may be common; but since they rarely result
in marked impairment, individuals with Simple Phobia rarely seek treatment.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is more often diagnosed in women.

    Differential diagnosis. In Schizophrenia certain activities may be avoided
in response to delusions. Similarly, in Obsessive Compulsive Disorder phobic
avoidance of certain situations that are associated with anxiety about dirt or
contamination is frequent. The diagnosis of Simple Phobia should not be made
in either case.

  Diagnostic criteria tor Simple Phobia
  A. A persistent, irrational fear of, and compelling desire to avoid, an
  object or a situation other than being alone, or in public places away
  from home (Agoraphobia), or of humiliation or embarrassment in certain
  social stations (Social Phobia). Phobic objects are often animals, and
  phobic situations frequently involve heights or closed spaces.


230 Diagnostic Categories

  B, Significant distress from the disturbance and recognition by the indi-
  vidual that his or her fear is excessive or unreasonable.

  C. Not due to another mental disorder, such as Schizophrenia or Obses-
  sive Compulsive Disorder.

ANXIETY STATES (OR ANXIETY NEUROSES)
300.01 Panic Disorder
The essential features are recurrent panic (anxiety) attacks that occur at times
unpredictably, though certain situations, e.g., driving a car, may become as-
 sociated with a panic attack. The same clinical picture occurring during marked
physical exertion or a life-threatening situation is not termed a panic attack.
    The panic attacks are manifested by the sudden onset of intense ap-
 prehension, fear, or terror, often associated with feelings of impending doom.
 The most common symptoms experienced during an attack are dyspnea; palpita-
 tions; chest pain or discomfort; choking or smothering sensations; dizziness,
 vertigo, or unsteady feelings; feelings of unreality (depersonalization or dereal-
 ization); paresthesias; hot and cold flashes; sweating; faintness; trembling or
 shaking; and fear of dying, going crazy, or doing something uncontrolled during
 the attack. Attacks usually last minutes; more rarely, hours.
     A common complication of this disorder is the development of an antic-
 ipatory fear of helplessness or loss of control during a panic attack, so that
 the individual becomes reluctant to be alone or in public places away from
 home. When many situations of the kind are avoided the diagnosis of Agora-
 phobia with Panic Attacks should be made (p. 226) rather than Panic Dis-
 order.

     Associated features. The individual often develops varying degrees of
 nervousness and apprehension between attacks. This nervousness and apprehen-
 sion is characterized by the usual manifestations of apprehensive expectation,
 vigilance and scanning, motor tension, and autonomic hyperactivity,

     Age at onset. The disorder often begins in late adolescence or early adult
 life, but may occur initially in mid-adult life.

     Course. The disorder may be limited to a single brief period lasting several
 weeks or months, recur several times, or become chronic.

     Impairment. Except when the disorder is severe or complicated by Agora-
 phobia, it is rarely incapacitating.

     Complications. The complication of Agoraphobia with Panic Attacks has
 been mentioned above. Other complications include abuse of alcohol and anti-
 anxiety medications, and Depressive Disorders.


                                               Anxiety Disorders 231

    Predisposing factors. Separation Anxiety Disorder in childhood and sud-
den object loss apparently predispose to the development of this disorder.

    Prevalence. The disorder is apparently common.

    Sex ratio. This condition is diagnosed much more commonly in women.

    Differential diagnosis. Physical disorders such as hypoglycemia, pheo-
chromocytoma, and hyperthyroidism, all of which can cause similar symptoms,
must be ruled out.
    In Withdrawal from some substances, such as barbiturates, and in some
Substance Intoxications, such as due to caffeine or amphetamines, there may be
panic attacks. Panic Disorder should not be diagnosed when the panic attacks
are due to Substance-induced Organic Mental Disorder.
    In Schizophrenia, Major Depression, or Somatization Disorder panic attacks
may occur. However, the diagnosis of Panic Disorder is not made if the panic
attacks are due to these other disorders.
    Generalized Anxiety Disorder may be confused with the chronic anxiety
that often develops between panic attacks in Panic Disorder. A history of recur-
rent panic attacks precludes Generalized Anxiety Disorder.
    In Simple or Social Phobia, the individual may develop panic attacks if
exposed to the phobic stimulus. However, in Panic Disorder, the individual is
never certain which situations provoke panic attacks.

  Diagnostic criteria lor Panic Disorder
  A, At least three panic attacks within a three-week period in circum-
  stances other than during marked physical exertion or in a life-threatening
  situation. The attacks are not precipitated only by exposure to a cir-
  cumscribed phobic stimulus.

  B. Panic attacks are manifested by discrete periods of apprehension or
  fear, and at least four of the following symptoms appear during each
  attack:

      (1) dyspnea
      (2) palpitations
      (3) chest pain or discomfort
      (4) choking or smothering sensations
      (5) dizziness, vertigo, or unsteady feelings
      (6) feelings of unreality
      (7) paresthesias (tingling in hands or feet)
      (8) hot and cold flashes
      (9) sweating
     (10) fatntness
     (11) trembling or shaking


232 Diagnostic Categories

      (12) fear of dying, going crazy, or doing something uncontrolled
      during an attack

  C. Not due to a physical disorder or another mental disorder, such
  as Major Depression, Somatization Disorder, or Schizophrenia.

  D, The disorder is not associated with Agoraphobia (p. 227).

300.02 Generalized Anxiety Disorder
The essential feature is generalized, persistent anxiety of at least one month's
duration without the specific symptoms that characterize Phobic Disorders
(phobias), Panic Disorder (panic attacks), or Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
(obsessions or compulsions). The diagnosis is not made if the disturbance is due
to another physical or mental disorder, such as hyperthyroidism or Major
Depression.
  Although the specific manifestations of the anxiety vary from individual to
individual, generally there are signs of motor tension, autonomic hyperactivity,
apprehensive expectation, and vigilance and scanning.

    (1) Motor tension. Shakiness, jitteriness, jumpiness, trembling, tension,
muscle aches, fatigability, and inability to relax are common complaints. There
may also be eyelid twitch, furrowed brow, strained face, fidgeting, restlessness,
easy startle, and sighing respiration.

    (2) Autonomic hyperactivity. There may be sweating, heart pounding or
racing, cold, clammy hands, dry mouth, dizziness, light-headedness, paresthesias
(tingling in hands or feet), upset stomach, hot or cold spells, frequent urination,
diarrhea, discomfort in the pit of the stomach, lump in the throat, flushing, pal-
lor, and high resting pulse and respiration rate.

    (3) Apprehensive expectation. The individual is generally apprehensive
and continually feels anxious, worries, ruminates, and anticipates that some-
thing bad will happen to himself or herself (e.g., fear of fainting, losing control,
dying) or to others (e.g., family members may become ill or injured in an
accident).

    (4) Vigilance and scanning. Apprehensive expectation may cause hyper-
attentiveness so that the individual feels "on edge," impatient, or irritable. There
may be complaints of distractibility, difficulty in concentrating, insomnia, dif-
ficulty in falling asleep, interrupted sleep, and fatigue on awakening.

    Associated features. Mild depressive symptoms are common.

    Impairment. Impairment in social or occupational functioning is rarely
more than mild.


                                               Anxiety Disorders 233

    Complications. Abuse of alcohol, barbiturates, and antianxiety medications
is common.

    Age at onset, course, predisposing factors, prevalence, sex ratio, and familial
pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. Physical disorders, such as hyperthyroidism, and
Organic Mental Disorders, such as Caffeine Intoxication, must be ruled out.
    In Adjustment Disorder with Anxious Mood, the full symptom picture re-
quired to meet the criteria for Generalized Anxiety Disorder is generally not
present, the duration of the disturbance is usually less than a month, and a
psychosocial stressor must be recognized.
    In Schizophrenia, Depressive Disorders, Hypochondriasis, Obsessive Com-
pulsive Disorder, and many other mental disorders, generalized and persistent
anxiety is often a prominent symptom. The diagnosis of Generalized Anxiety
Disorder is not made if the anxiety is judged to be due to another mental dis-
order.
    In Panic Disorder there is often severe chronic anxiety between panic at-
tacks. If the panic attacks are overlooked, an incorrect diagnosis of Generalized
Anxiety Disorder may be made.

  Diagnostic criteria for Generalized Anxiety Disorder
  A. Generalized, persistent anxiety is manifested by symptoms from three
  of the following four categories;

      (1) motor tension: shakiness, jitteriness, jumpiness, trembling, ten-
      sion, muscle aches, fatigabjlity, inability to relax, eyelid twitch, fur-
      rowed brow, strained face, fidgeting, restlessness, easy startle
      (2) autonomic hyperactivity: sweating, heart pounding or racing,
      cold, clammy hands, dry mouth, dizziness, light-headedness, pares-
      thesias (tingling in hands or feet), upset stomach, hot or cold spells,
      frequent urination, diarrhea, discomfort in the pit of the stomach,
      lump in the throat, flushing, pallor, high resting pulse and respira-
      tion rate
      (3) apprehensive expectation: anxiety, worry, fear, rumination, and
      anticipation of misfortune to self or others
      (4) vigilance and scanning: hyperattentiveness resulting in distracti-
      bility, difficulty in concentrating, insomnia, feeling "on edge/' ir-
      ritability, impatience

  B. The anxious mood has been continuous for at least one month.

  C Not due to another mental disorder, such as a Depressive Disorder or
  Schizophrenia.

  D, At least 18 years of age.


234 Diagnostic Categories

300.30 Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (or Obsessive Compulsive Neurosis)
The essential features are recurrent obsessions or compulsions. Obsessions
are recurrent, persistent ideas, thoughts, images, or impulses that are ego-
dystonic, that is, they are not experienced as voluntarily produced, but rather
as thoughts that invade consciousness and are experienced as senseless or
repugnant. Attempts are made to ignore or suppress them. Compulsions are
repetitive and seemingly purposeful behaviors that are performed according to
certain rules or in a stereotyped fashion. The behavior is not an end in itself,
but is designed to produce or to prevent some future event or situation. How-
ever, the activity is not connected in a realistic way with what it is designed
to produce or prevent, or may be clearly excessive. The act is performed with a
sense of subjective compulsion coupled with a desire to resist the compulsion
(at least initially). The individual generally recognizes the senselessness of the
behavior (this may not be true for young children) and does not derive pleasure
from carrying out the activity, although it provides a release of tension.
    The most common obsessions are repetitive thoughts of violence (e.g., killing
one's child), contamination (e.g., becoming infected by shaking hands), and
doubt (e.g., repeatedly wondering whether one has performed some action, such
as having hurt someone in a traffic accident). The most common compulsions
involve hand-washing, counting, checking, and touching.
    When the individual attempts to resist a compulsion, there is a sense of
mounting tension that can be immediately relieved by yielding to the compul-
sion. In the course of the illness, after repeated failure at resisting the com-
pulsions, the individual may give in to them and no longer experience a desire
to resist them.

    Associated features. Depression and anxiety are common. Frequently there
is phobic avoidance of situations that involve the content of the obsessions, such
as dirt or contamination.

    Age at onset. Although the disorder usually begins in adolescence or early
adulthood, it may begin in childhood.

    Course. The course is usually chronic, with waxing and waning of symp-
toms.

    Impairment. Impairment is generally moderate to severe. In some cases
compulsions may become the major life activity.

    Complications. Complications include Major Depression and the abuse
of alcohol and antianxiety medications.

    Predisposing factors. No information.

    Prevalence. The disorder is apparently rare in the general population.

    Sex ratio. This disorder is equally common in males and in females.


                                               Anxiety Disorders 235

    Differential diagnosis. Some activities, such as eating, sexual behavior (e.g.,
 Paraphilias), gambling, or drinking, when engaged in excessively may be referred
 to as "compulsive". However, these activities are not true compulsions, because
 the individual derives pleasure from the particular activity and may wish to
 resist it only because of its secondary deleterious consequences.
    Obsessive brooding, rumination or preoccupation, i.e., excessive and repeti-
 tive thinking about real or potentially unpleasant circumstances, or indecisive
 consideration of alternatives lacks the quality of being ego-dystonic, because the
individual generally regards the ideation as meaningful, although possibly ex-
 cessive. Therefore, these are not true obsessions.
    In Schizophrenia, stereotyped behavior is common, but can be explained by
delusions rather than as being ego-dystonic. Obsessions and compulsions some-
times occur transiently during the prodromal phase of Schizophrenia. In such
cases the diagnosis of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder is not made. Tourette's
Disorder, Schizophrenia, Major Depression and, very rarely, Organic Mental
Disorder may have obsessions and compulsions as symptoms, but in such in-
stances the diagnosis Obsessive Compulsive Disorder is not made. However,
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder may precede the development of a Major De-
pression, in which case both diagnoses should be recorded.

  Diagnostic criteria lor Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
  A. Either obsessions or compulsions;
      Obsessions: recurrent, persistent Wets, thoughts, images, or im-
      pulses that are ego-dystonic, i.e., they are not experienced as volun-
      tarily produced, but rather as thoughts that invade consciousness
      and are experienced as senseless or repugnant. Attempts are made
      to Ignore or suppress them.

      Compulsions: repetitive and seemingly purposeful behaviors that
      are performed according to certain rules or in a stereotyped fashion.
      The behavior is not an end in itself, but is designed to produce or
      prevent some future event or situation. However, either the activity
      is not connected In a realistic way with what it is designed to pro-
      duce or prevent, or may be clearly excessive. The act is performed
      with a sense of subjective compulsion coupled with a desire to
      resist the compulsion (at least initially). The individual generally
      recognizes the senselessness of the behavior (this may not be true for
      young children) and does not derive pleasure from carrying out the
      activity, although it provides a release of tension.

  B. The obsessions or compulsions are a significant source of distress to
  the individual or interfere with social or role functioning.

  C. Not due to another mental disorder, such as Tourette's Disorder,
  Schizophrenia, Major Depression, or Organic Mental Disorder.


236 Diagnostic Categories

308.30 Post-traumatic Stress Disorder, Acute

309.81 Post-traumatic Stress Disorder, Chronic or Delayed
The essential feature is the development of characteristic symptoms following a
psychologically traumatic event that is generally outside the range of usual
human experience.
    The characteristic symptoms involve reexperiencing the traumatic event;
numbing of responsiveness to, or reduced involvement with, the external
world; and a variety of autonomic, dysphoric, or cognitive symptoms.
    The stressor producing this syndrome would evoke significant symptoms of
distress in most people, and is generally outside the range of such common
experiences as simple bereavement, chronic illness, business losses, or marital
conflict. The trauma may be experienced alone (rape or assault) or in the com-
pany of groups of people (military combat). Stressors producing this disorder
include natural disasters (floods, earthquakes), accidental man-made disasters
(car accidents with serious physical injury, airplane crashes, large fires), or
deliberate man-made disasters (bombing, torture, death camps). Some stressors
frequently produce the disorder (e.g., torture) and others produce it only occa-
sionally (e.g., car accidents). Frequently there is a concomitant physical com-
ponent to the trauma which may even involve direct damage to the central
nervous system (e.g., malnutrition, head trauma). The disorder is apparently
more severe and longer lasting when the stressor is of human design. The
severity of the stressor should be recorded and the specific stressor may be
noted on Axis IV (p. 26).
    The traumatic event can be reexperienced in a variety of ways. Commonly
the individual has recurrent painful, intrusive recollections of the event or re-
current dreams or nightmares during which the event is reexperienced. In rare
instances there are dissociativelike states, lasting from a few minutes to several
hours or even days, during which components of the event are relived and the
individual behaves as though experiencing the event at that moment. Such states
have been reported in combat veterans. Diminished responsiveness to the ex-
ternal world, referred to as "psychic numbing" or "emotional anesthesia," usually
begins soon after the traumatic event. A person may complain of feeling de-
tached or estranged from other people, that he or she has lost the ability to
become interested in previously enjoyed significant activities, or that the ability
to feel emotions of any type, especially those associated with intimacy, tender-
ness, and sexuality, is markedly decreased.
    After experiencing the stressor, many develop symptoms of excessive
autonomic arousal, such as hyperalertness, exaggerated startle response, and
difficulty falling asleep. Recurrent nightmares during which the traumatic event
is relived and which are sometimes accompanied by middle or terminal sleep
disturbance may be present. Some complain of impaired memory or difficulty
in concentrating or completing tasks. In the case of a life-threatening trauma
shared with others, survivors often describe painful guilt feelings about surviving
when many did not, or about the things they had to do in order to survive.
Activities or situations that may arouse recollections of the traumatic event are


                                              Anxiety Disorders 237

often avoided. Symptoms characteristic of Post-traumatic Stress Disorder are
often intensified when the individual is exposed to situations or activities that
resemble or symbolize the original trauma (e.g., cold snowy weather or uni-
formed guards for death-camp survivors, hot, humid weather for veterans of
the South Pacific).

    Associated features. Symptoms of depression and anxiety are common,
and in some instances may be sufficiently severe to be diagnosed as an Anxiety
or Depressive Disorder. Increased irritability may be associated with sporadic
and unpredictable explosions of aggressive behavior, upon even minimal or no
provocation. The latter symptom has been reported to be particularly character-
istic of war veterans with this disorder. Impulsive behavior can occur, such as
sudden trips, unexplained absences, or changes in life-style or residence. Sur-
vivors of death camps sometimes have symptoms of an Organic Mental Dis-
order, such as failing memory, difficulty in concentrating, emotional lability,
autonomic lability, headache, and vertigo.

    Age at onset. The disorder can occur at any age, including during childhood.

    Course and subtypes. Symptoms may begin immediately or soon after
the trauma. It is not unusual, however, for the symptoms to emerge after a
latency period of months or years following the trauma.
    When the symptoms begin within six months of the trauma and have not
lasted more than six months, the acute subtype is diagnosed, and the prognosis
for remission is good. If the symptoms either develop more than six months
after the trauma or last six months or more, the chronic or delayed subtype is
diagnosed.

    Impairment and complications. Impairment may either be mild or affect
nearly every aspect of life. Phobic avoidance of situations or activities resembling
or symbolizing the original trauma may result in occupational or recreational
impairment. "Psychic numbing" may interfere with interpersonal relationships,
such as marriage or family life. Emotional lability, depression, and guilt may
result in self-defeating behavior or suicidal actions. Substance Use Disorders
may develop.

    Predisposing factors. Preexisting psychopathology apparently predisposes
to the development of the disorder.

    Prevalence. No information.

    Sex ratio and familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. If an Anxiety, Depressive, or Organic Mental Dis-
order develops following the trauma, these diagnoses should also be made.
    In Adjustment Disorder, the stressor is usually less severe and within the
range of common experience; and the characteristic symptoms of Post-traumatic
Stress Disorder, such as reexperiencing the trauma, are absent.


238 Diagnostic Categories

  Diagnostic criteria for Post-traumatic Stress Disorder
  A. Existence of a recognizable stressor that would evoke significant
  symptoms of distress in almost everyone.

  B. Reexperiencing of the trauma as evidenced by at least one of the
  following:
      (1) recurrent and intrusive recollections of the event
      (2) recurrent dreams of the event
      (3) sudden acting or feeling as if the traumatic event were reoc-
      curring, because of an association with an environmental or idea-
      tional stimulus

  C. Numbing of responsiveness to or reduced involvement with the
  external world, beginning some time after the trauma, as shown by at
  least one of the following:
      (1) markedly diminished interest in one or more significant activities
      (2) feeling of detachment or estrangement from others
      (3) constricted affect

  D. At least two of the following symptoms that were not present before
  the trauma:
      (1) hyperalertness or exaggerated startle response
      (2) sleep disturbance
      (3) guilt about surviving when others have not, or about behavior
      required for survival
      (4) memory impairment or trouble concentrating
      (5) avoidance of activities that arouse recollection of the traumatic
      event
      (6) intensification of symptoms by exposure to events that symbolize
      or resemble the traumatic event

SUBTYPES

  Post-traumatic Stress Disorder, Acute

  A. Onset of symptoms within six months of the trauma.

  B. Duration of symptoms less than six months.

  Post-traumatic Stress Disorder, Chronic or Delayed
  Either of the following, or both:

      (1) duration of symptoms six months or more (chronic)
      (2) onset of symptoms at least six months after the trauma (delayed)


                                              Anxiety Disorders 239

300.00 Atypical Anxiety Disorder
This category should be used when the individual appears to have an
Anxiety Disorder that does not meet the criteria for any of the above specified
conditions.


This page intentionally left blank 


                       Somatoform Disorders


The essential features of this group of disorders are physical symptoms sug-
gesting physical disorder (hence, Somatoform) for which there are no demonstra-
ble organic findings or known physiological mechanisms and for which there
is positive evidence, or a strong presumption, that the symptoms are linked to
psychological factors or conflicts. Unlike Factitious Disorder or Malingering, the
symptom production in Somatoform Disorders is not under voluntary control,
i.e., the individual does not experience the sense of controlling the production
of the symptoms. Although the symptoms of Somatoform Disorders are "physi-
cal," the specific pathophysiological processes involved are not demonstrable or
understandable by existing laboratory procedures and are conceptualized most
clearly using psychological constructs. For that reason, these disorders are not
classified as "physical disorders."
    The first disorder in this category is Somatization Disorder, a common and
chronic polysymptomatic disorder that begins early in life and that was previ-
ously referred to as either Hysteria or Briquet's Syndrome. The second disorder
is Conversion Disorder, which, as defined here, is relatively uncommon. This
diagnosis is to be used only when conversion symptoms are the predominant
disturbance and are not symptomatic of another disorder. Psychogenic Pain
Disorder is characterized by psychologically induced pain not attributable to any
other mental or physical disorder. Hypochondriasis involves preoccupation with
the fear or belief of having a serious disease. Finally, Atypical Somatoform
Disorder is the term applied to physical symptoms without an organic basis
that do not fit the criteria for any specific Somatoform Disorder.

300.81 Somatization Disorder
The essential features are recurrent and multiple somatic complaints of
several years' duration for which medical attention has been sought but which
are apparently not due to any physical disorder. The disorder begins before the
age of 30 and has a chronic but fluctuating course.
    Complaints are often presented in a dramatic, vague, or exaggerated way,
or are part of a complicated medical history in which many physical diagnoses
have been considered. The individuals frequently receive medical care from a
number of physicians, sometimes simultaneously. (Although most people with-
out mental disorders at various times have aches and pains and other physical
complaints, they rarely bring them to medical attention.) Complaints invariably
involve the following organ systems or types of symptoms: conversion or
pseudoneurological (e.g., paralysis, blindness), gastrointestinal (e.g., abdominal
pain), female reproductive (e.g., painful menstruation), psychosexual (e.g.,
sexual indifference), pain (e.g., back pain), and cardiopulmonary (e.g., dizziness).

                                241


242 Diagnostic Categories

    Associated features. Anxiety and depressed mood are extremely common.
In fact, many individuals with this disorder who seek mental health care do so
because of the depressive symptoms, which include suicide threats and attempts.
Antisocial behavior and occupational, interpersonal, and marital difficulties are
common. Hallucinations are also reported; this is usually the hallucination of
hearing one's name called without impairment of reality testing. Histrionic Per-
sonality Disorder and, more rarely, Antisocial Personality Disorder often are
also present.

    Age at onset. Symptoms usually begin in the teen years or, rarely, in the
20s. Menstrual difficulties may be one of the earliest symptoms in females,
although preadolescents and adolescents may present with seizures, depressive
symptoms, headache, abdominal pain, or a plethora of other physical symptoms.

    Course. This is a chronic but fluctuating disorder that rarely remits spon-
taneously. A year seldom passes without some medical attention.

    Impairment and complications. Because of constant seeking out of doctors,
numerous medical evaluations are undergone, both in and out of the hospital; and
there is frequently unwitting submission to unnecessary surgery. These indi-
viduals run the risk of Substance Use Disorders involving various prescribed
medicines. Because of depressive symptoms, they may experience long periods
of incapacity and frequent suicidal threats and attempts. Completed suicide,
when it occurs, is usually associated with Substance Abuse. People with this
disorder often lead lives as chaotic and complicated as their medical histories.

    Predisposing factors. No information.

    Prevalence and sex ratio. Approximately 1% of females have this dis-
order. The disorder is rarely diagnosed in males.

    Familial pattern. This disorder and Antisocial Personality Disorder are
more common among family members than in the general population.

    Differential diagnosis. It is necessary to rule out physical disorders that
present with vague, multiple, and confusing somatic symptoms, e.g., hyperpara-
 thyroidism, porphyria, multiple sclerosis, and systemic lupus erythematosis. The
onset of multiple physical symptoms late in life is almost always due to physi-
 cal disease.
    Schizophrenia with multiple somatic delusions needs to be differentiated
 from the nondelusional somatic complaints of individuals with Somatization
 Disorder. Rarely, individuals with Somatization Disorder also have Schizo-
 phrenia, in which case both diagnoses should be noted.
    Dysthymic Disorder and Generalized Anxiety Disorder are not diagnosed
 in individuals who have Somatization Disorder since mild depressive and anxiety
 symptoms are so ubiquitous in Somatization Disorder. On the other hand, a
 superimposed Major Depression should be diagnosed if there is a full and per-


                                          Somatoform Disorders 243

 sistent affective syndrome that can be clearly distinguished from the individual's
usual condition.
    In Panic Disorder there are also cardiopulmonary symptoms, but these occur
only in the context of panic attacks. However, Panic Disorder may coexist with
 Somatization Disorder, in which case both diagnoses should be made.
    In Conversion Disorder one or more conversion symptoms occur in the
 absence of the full clinical picture of Somatization Disorder.
    In Factitious Disorder with Physical Symptoms the individual has voluntary
control of the symptoms.

   Diagnostic criteria lor Somatization Disorder
  A, A history of physical symptoms of several years' duration beginning
  before the age of 30.

   B. Complaints of at least 14 symptoms for women and 12 for men, from
  the 37 symptoms listed below. To count a symptom as present the indi-
  vidual must report that the symptom caused him or her to take medicine
   (other than aspirin), alter his or her life pattern, or see a physician. The
  symptoms, in the judgment of the clinician, are not adequately explained
   by physical disorder or physical injury, and are not side effects of medica-
  tion, drugs or alcohol. The clinician need not be convinced that the
  symptom was actually present, e.g., that the individual actually vomited
  throughout her entire pregnancy; report of the symptom by the individual
  is sufficient,

      Sickly: Believes that he or she has been sickly for a good part of his
      or her life.

      Conversion or pseitdonewological symptoms: Difficulty swallowing,
      loss of voice, deafness, double vision, blurred vision, blindness,
      fainting or loss of consciousness, memory loss, seizures or con-
      vulsions, trouble walking, paralysis or muscle weakness, urinary re-
      tention or difficulty urinating.

      Gastrointestinal symptoms: Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting spells
      (other than during pregnancy), bloating (gassy), intolerance (e.g.,
      gets sick) of a variety of foods, diarrhea.

      Female reproductive symptoms: judged by the individual as occurring
      more frequently or severely than in most women: painful menstrua-
      tion, menstrual irregularity, excessive bleeding, severe vomiting
      throughout pregnancy or causing hospitalizatton during pregnancy.

      Psychosexual symptoms: For the major part of the Individual's life
      after opportunities for sexual activity: sexual indifference, lack of
      pleasure during intercourse, pain during intercourse.


244 Diagnostic Categories

      Pain: Pain in back/ joints, extremities, genital area {other than during
      intercourse); pain on urination; other pain (other than headaches).

      Cardlopulmonary symptoms: Shortness of breath, palpitations, chest
      pain, dizziness.

300.11 Conversion Disorder (or Hysterical Neurosis, Conversion Type)
The essential feature is a clinical picture in which the predominant disturbance
is a loss of or alteration in physical functioning that suggests physical disorder
but which instead is apparently an expression of a psychological conflict or
need. The disturbance is not under voluntary control, and after appropriate
investigation cannot be explained by any physical disorder or known patho-
physiological mechanism. Conversion Disorder is not diagnosed when conversion
symptoms are limited to pain (see Psychogenic Pain Disorder, p. 247) or to a
disturbance in sexual functioning (see Psychosexual Dysfunctions, p. 275) or are
part of Somatization Disorder (p. 241).
    The most obvious and "classic" conversion symptoms are those that suggest
neurological disease, such as paralysis, aphonia, seizures, coordination distur-
bance, akinesia, dyskinesia, blindness, tunnel vision, anosmia, anesthesia, and
paresthesia. More rarely, conversion symptoms may involve the autonomic or
endocrine system. Vomiting as a conversion symptom can represent revulsion
and disgust. Pseudocyesis (false pregnancy) can represent both a wish for, and
a fear of, pregnancy.
    The definition of this disorder is unique in this classification in that it im-
plies specific mechanisms to account for the disturbance. Two mechanisms have
been suggested to explain what the individual derives from having a conversion
symptom.
    In one mechanism, the individual achieves "primary gain" by keeping an
internal conflict or need out of awareness. In such cases there is a temporal
relationship between an environmental stimulus that is apparently related to a
psychological conflict or need and the initiation or exacerbation of the symptom.
For example, after an argument, inner conflict about the expression of rage may
be expressed as "aphonia" or as a "paralysis" of the arm; or if the individual
views a traumatic event, a conflict about acknowledging that event may be
expressed as "blindness." In such cases the symptom has a symbolic value that
is a representation and partial solution of the underlying psychological conflict.
    In the other mechanism the individual achieves "secondary gain" by avoid-
ing a particular activity that is noxious to him or her or by getting support from
the environment that otherwise might not be forthcoming. For example, with a
"paralyzed" hand a soldier can avoid firing a gun; or a person with marked
dependency needs may develop "blindness" or inability to walk or stand, even
though all leg movements can be performed normally (astasia-abasia), to prevent
desertion by a spouse.
    A conversion symptom is likely to involve a single symptom during a
given episode, but may vary in site and nature if there are subsequent episodes.


                                          Somatoform Disorders 245

    Associated features. Usually the symptom develops in a setting of extreme
psychological stress and appears suddenly. Histrionic personality traits (see p.
313) are common, but not invariably present. "La belle indifference," an attitude
toward the symptom that suggests a relative lack of concern, out of keeping
with the severe nature of the impairment, is sometimes present. This feature
has little diagnostic value, however, since it is also found in some seriously ill
medical patients who are stoic about their situation.

    Age at onset. The usual age at onset is adolescence or early adulthood, but
the symptom may appear for the first time during middle age or even in the
later decades of life.

    Course. The course of Conversion Disorder (as distinct from conversion
symptoms that are part of other disorders, such as Somatization Disorder) is
unknown, but probably is usually of short duration, with abrupt onset and
resolution. Some individuals given an initial diagnosis of conversion symptoms
are later found to have a neurological disorder. Apparently, in some of these
instances the earliest symptoms of the neurological disorder predisposed to the
development of a concomitant conversion symptom. In other instances the
original diagnosis of a conversion symptom was incorrect and represented a
missed diagnosis of true organic pathology.

    Impairment and complications. The effect of the disorder on the individual's
life is usually marked and frequently prevents normal life activities. Prolonged
loss of function may produce real and serious complications, such as contrac-
tures or disuse atrophy from conversion paralysis. When associated with De-
pendent Personality Disorder, the conversion symptom may enhance the develop-
ment of a chronic sick role. Unnecessary diagnostic or therapeutic medical
procedures may themselves produce disfigurement or incapacity.

    Predisposing factors. Antecedent physical disorder (which may provide a
prototype for the symptoms, e.g., pseudoseizures in individuals with epilepsy),
exposure to other individuals with real physical symptoms or conversion symp-
toms, and extreme psychosocial stress (e.g., warfare or the recent death of a
significant figure) are predisposing factors. Histrionic and Dependent Personality
Disorders also predispose to the development of the disorder.

    Prevalence. Although Conversion Disorder was apparently common several
decades ago, it is now rarely encountered. Most cases are seen on neurology or
orthopedic wards and in military settings, especially in time of warfare.

    Sex ratio. No definite information is available; but one particular conversion
symptom, globus hystericus, the feeling of a lump in the throat that interferes
with swallowing, is apparently more common in women.

    Familial pattern. No information.


 246 Diagnostic Categories

    Differential diagnosis. Some physical disorders that present with vague,
multiple, somatic symptoms, such as multiple sclerosis or systemic lupus erythe-
matosis, may early in their course be misdiagnosed as conversion symptoms. A
diagnosis of Conversion Disorder is suggested if the symptoms are inconsistent
with the actual known physical disorder—for example, motor signs of good
function in a supposedly paralyzed part, or complaints obviously inconsistent
with the anatomic distribution of the nervous system. Another example would
be "anesthesia" of the hand conforming to the concept of the hand rather than
to the functional area served by a specific part of the nervous system. In another
example, an individual with conversion blindness may be found to have normal
pupillary responses and evoked potentials as measured by an EEG. Resolution
of symptoms through suggestion, hypnosis, or narcoanalysis suggests a conver-
sion symptom. Temporary improvement due to suggestion has little diagnostic
value since this may also occur with true physical illness.
    In undiagnosed physical disorder physical symptoms are present that are
not explained by a known physical disorder, but there is no evidence that the
symptom serves a psychological purpose. Physical disorders in which psycho-
logical factors often play an important role, such as irritable colon or bronchial
asthma, should not be diagnosed as Conversion Disorders, since demonstrable
organic pathology or a pathophysiological mechanism that accounts for the
disorder is present.
    Somatization Disorder and, more rarely, Schizophrenia may have conver-
sion symptoms. However, the diagnosis of Conversion Disorder should not be
made when such symptoms are due to either of these more pervasive disorders.
    For many of the Psychosexual Dysfunctions, it is difficult to determine
whether the symptom, such as impotence in the male or lack of sexual excite-
ment in the female, represents a physiological reaction to anxiety or a direct
expression of a psychological conflict or need (conversion symptom). For this
reason, and in order to group all of the sexual disturbances together, conversion
symptoms involving sexual dysfunction are not coded as Conversion Disorder,
but rather as Psychosexual Dysfunction.
    Some psychogenic pain can be conceptualized as a conversion symptom;
but because of the different course and treatment implications, all such cases
should be coded as Psychogenic Pain Disorder.
    In Hypochondriasis typically there are physical symptoms, but there is no
actual loss or distortion of bodily function.
    In Factitious Disorder with Physical Symptoms, the symptoms are, by
definition, under voluntary control; and the simulated illness rarely takes the
form of neurological symptoms that are likely to be confused with conversion
symptoms. However, distinguishing conversion seizures from seizures as a
manifestation of Factitious Disorder is often extremely difficult.
    In Malingering the symptom production is under the individual's voluntary
control and is in pursuit of a goal that is obviously recognizable given the
individual's environmental circumstance; this goal frequently involves the pros-
pect of material reward or the avoidance of unpleasant work or duty.


                                           Somatoform Disorders 247

   Diagnostic criteria for Conversion Disorder
   A. The predominant disturbance is a loss of or alteration in physical
   functioning suggesting a physical disorder.

   B. Psychological factors are judged to be etiologically involved in the
   symptom, as evidenced by one of the following:

       (1) there is a temporal relationship between an environmental
       stimulus that is apparently related to a psychological conflict or need
       and the inttiation or exacerbation of the symptom
       (2) the symptom enables the individual to avoid some activity that is
       noxious to him or her
       (3) the symptom enables the individual to get support from the
       environment that otherwise might not be forthcoming

   C. It has been determined that the symptom is not under voluntary con-
   trol.

   D. The symptom cannot, after appropriate investigation, be explained by
   a known physical disorder or pathophysiological mechanism.

   E. The symptom is not limited to pain or to a disturbance in sexual func-
   tioning.

   F. Not due to Somatization Disorder or Schizophrenia.

307.80 Psychogenic Pain Disorder
 The essential feature is a clinical picture in which the predominant feature is
 the complaint of pain, in the absence of adequate physical findings and in
 association with evidence of the etiological role of psychological factors. The
 disturbance is not due to any other mental disorder.
    The pain symptom either is inconsistent with the anatomic distribution
 of the nervous system or, if it mimics a known disease entity (as in angina or
 sciatica), cannot be adequately accounted for by organic pathology, after exten-
 sive diagnostic evaluation. Similarly, no pathophysiological mechanism ac-
 counts for the pain, as in tension headaches caused by muscle spasm.
    That psychological factors are etiologically involved in the pain may be
evidenced by a temporal relationship between an environmental stimulus that
is apparently related to a psychological conflict or need and the initiation or
 exacerbation of the pain, or by the pain's permitting the individual to avoid
 some activity that is noxious to him or her or to get support from the environ-
 ment that otherwise might not be forthcoming.

    Associated features. Psychogenic Pain Disorder may be accompanied by
other localized sensory or motor function changes, such as paresthesias and
muscle spasm. There often are frequent visits to physicians to obtain relief


248 Diagnostic Categories

despite medical reassurance (doctor-shopping), excessive use of analgesics with-
out relief of the pain, requests for surgery, and the assumption of an invalid
role. The individual usually refuses to consider the role of psychological factors
in the pain. In some cases the pain has symbolic significance, such as pain
mimicking angina in an individual whose father died from heart disease. A
past history of conversion symptoms is common. Histrionic personality traits
(see p. 313) are seldom present, nor is "la belle indifference," though concern
about the pain symptom is usually less intense than its stated severity. Dys-
phoric moods are common.

    Age at onset. This disorder can occur at any stage of life, from childhood
to old age, but it seems to begin most frequently in adolescence or early adult-
hood.

    Course. The pain usually appears suddenly and increases in severity over
a few days or weeks. The symptom may subside with appropriate intervention
or termination of a precipitating event, or it may persist for months or years if
reinforced.

    Impairment. This varies with the intensity and duration of the pain and
may range from a slight disturbance of social or occupational functioning to
total incapacity and need for hospitalization.

    Complications. The most serious complications are iatrogenic; they include
dependence on minor tranquilizers and narcotic analgesics and repeated, un-
successful, surgical intervention.

    Predisposing factors. Severe psychosocial stress is a predisposing factor.

    Prevalence. No information, although the disorder is probably common in
general medical practice.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is more frequently diagnosed in women.

    Familial pattern. Relatives of individuals with this disorder have had more
painful injuries and illnesses than occur in the general population.

    Differential diagnosis. The dramatic presentation of organic pain, which
may seem excessive to an observer because of only slight physical findings, is
not sufficient for diagnosing the disorder, and may be only a function of histri-
onic personality traits or a cultural style of communication.
    Individuals with Somatization Disorder, Depressive Disorders, or Schizo-
phrenia may complain of various aches and pains, but the pain rarely dominates
the clinical picture, and Psychogenic Pain Disorder should not be diagnosed if
the pain is due to any other mental disorder.
    In Malingering, the symptom production is under the individual's voluntary
control, and is in pursuit of a goal that is obviously recognizable given the


                                           Somatoform Disorders 249

 individual's environmental circumstances. For example, an individual with Opi-
 oid Dependence complains of pain in order to obtain opioids.
     The pain associated with muscle contraction headaches ("tension head-
 aches") is not to be diagnosed as Psychogenic Pain Disorder because there is a
 pathophysiological mechanism that accounts for the pain.
     Complete disappearance of pain through suggestion, hypnosis, or narco-
 analysis suggests Psychogenic Pain Disorder. Temporary improvement due to
 suggestion has little diagnostic value since it may also occur in true physical
 illness.

   Diagnostic criteria for Psychogenic pain Disorder
   A. Severe and prolonged pain is the predominant disturbance,

   B. The pain presented as a symptom is Inconsistent with the anatomic
   distribution of the nervous system; after extensive evaluation, no organic
   pathology or pathophysiological mechanism can be found to account
   for the pain; or, when there is some related organic pathology, the com-
   plaint of pain is grossly in excess of what would be expected from the
   physical findings.

   C. Psychological factors are judged to be etiologically involved in the
   pain, as evidenced by at least one of the following;

       (1) a temporal relationship between an environmental stimulus that
       is apparently related to a psychological conflict Or need and the
       initiation or exacerbation of the pain
       (2) the pain's enabling the individual to avoid some activity that is
       noxious to him or her
       (3) the pain's enabling the individual to get support from the en-
       vironment that otherwise might not be forthcoming

   D. Not due to another mental disorder.

 300.70 Hypochondriasis (or Hypochondriacal Neurosis)
 The essential feature is a clinical picture in which the predominant disturbance
 is an unrealistic interpretation of physical signs or sensations as abnormal,
leading to preoccupation with the fear or belief of having a serious disease. A
thorough physical evaluation does not support the diagnosis of any physical
disorder that can account for the physical signs or sensations or for the indi-
vidual's unrealistic interpretation of them, although a coexisting physical dis-
order may be present. The unrealistic fear or belief of having a disease persists
despite medical reassurance and causes impairment in social or occupational
functioning. The disturbance is not due to any other mental disorder, such as
Schizophrenia, Affective Disorder, or Somatization Disorder.


 250 Diagnostic Categories

    The preoccupation may be with bodily functions, such as heartbeat, sweat-
ing, or peristalsis, or with minor physical abnormalities, such as a small sore
or an occasional cough. The individual interprets these sensations or signs as
evidence of a serious disease. The feared disease or diseases may involve several
body systems at different times or simultaneously. Alternatively, there may be
preoccupation with a specific organ and a single disease, as in "cardiac neuro-
sis," in which the individual fears or believes that he or she has heart disease.

    Associated features. The medical history is often presented in great detail
 and at length. A history of "doctor shopping" and deterioration in "doctor-
 patient" relationships, with frustration and anger on both sides, is common.
 Individuals with this disorder frequently believe that they are not getting proper
 care. The physical complaints may be used to exert control over relationships
 with family and friends.
     Anxiety and depressed mood and compulsive personality traits are common.

     Age at onset. Most commonly the age at onset is in adolescence, although
 frequently the disorder begins in the 30s for men and the 40s for women.

     Course. The course is usually chronic, with waxing and waning of symp-
 toms.

     Impairment. By definition there is always some impairment in social or
 occupational functioning. Social relations are often strained because the indi-
 vidual is preoccupied with disease. There may be no effect on functioning at
 work if the individual limits the preoccupation with physical complaints to
 nonwork time. On the other hand, there may be missed work or interference
 with work efficiency because of the preoccupation. Impairment is severe when
 the individual adopts an invalid life-style and becomes bedridden.

     Complications. Complications are secondary to efforts to obtain medical
 care. Because of the multiple physical symptoms without organic basis, true
 organic pathology may be missed. In addition, when the individual goes from
 doctor to doctor, there is the danger of repeated diagnostic procedures that carry
 risks of their own, such as exploratory surgery.

     Predisposing factors. A past experience with true organic disease in oneself
 or a family member and psychosocial stressors apparently predispose to the
 development of this disorder.

     Prevalence. This disorder is commonly seen in general medical practice.
 Because individuals with the disorder are often offended at the suggestion that
 their fears or beliefs may be unrealistic, they frequently refuse referral for
 mental health care and are not often seen in mental health facilities.

     Sex ratio. The disorder is equally common in men and women.


                                           Somatoform Disorders 251

     Familial pattern. No information.

     Differential diagnosis. The most important differential diagnostic considera-
 tion is true organic disease, such as early stages of neurological disorders (e.g.,
 multiple sclerosis), endocrine disorders (e.g., thyroid or parathyroid disease),
 and illnesses that frequently affect multiple body systems (e.g., systemic lupus
 erythematosis). However, the presence of true organic disease does not rule out
 the possibility of coexisting Hypochondriasis.
     In some psychotic disorders, such as Schizophrenia and Major Depression
 with Psychotic Features, there may be somatic delusions of having a disease.
 In Hypochondriasis the belief of having a disease generally does not have the
 fixed quality of a true somatic delusion in that usually the individual with
 Hypochondriasis can entertain the possibility that the feared disease is not
 present. The symptoms of hypochondriacal preoccupation may be present in
 psychotic disorders, in which case the additional diagnosis of Hypochondriasis
 is not made.
     In Dysthymic Disorder, Panic Disorder, Generalized Anxiety Disorder,
 Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, and Somatization Disorder the symptom of
 hypochondriacal preoccupation may appear, but generally it is not the predomi-
 nant disturbance. In Somatization Disorder there tends to be preoccupation with
 symptoms rather than fear of having a specific disease or diseases. When the
 criteria for any of these disorders are met and the hypochondriacal preoccupa-
 tion is due to one of these disorders, the additional diagnosis of Hypochondriasis
 is not made.

   Diagnostic criteria for Hypochondriasis
  A. The predominant disturbance is an unrealistic interpretation of physi-
   cal signs or sensations as abnormal, leading to preoccupation with the
   fear or belief of having a serious disease.

   B. Thorough physical evaluation does not support the diagnosis of any
  physical disorder that can account for the physical signs or sensations or
   for the individual's unrealistic interpretation of them,

  C. The unrealistic fear or belief of having a disease persists despite medi-
  cal reassurance and causes impairment in social or occupational func-
  tioning.

  D. Not due to any other mental disorder such as Schizophrenia, Af-
  fective Disorder, or Somatization Disorder.

300.70 Atypical Somatoform Disorder
This is a residual category to be used when the predominant disturbance is the
presentation of physical symptoms or complaints not explainable on the basis
of demonstrable organic findings or a known pathophysiological mechanism
and apparently linked to psychological factors.


252 Diagnostic Categories

    An example of cases that can be classified here include those of individuals
who are preoccupied with some imagined defect in physical appearance that is
out of proportion to any actual physical abnormality that may exist. This syn-
drome has sometimes been termed "Dysmorphophobia."


                       Dissociative Disorders


The essential feature is a sudden, temporary alteration in the normally integra-
tive functions of consciousness, identity, or motor behavior. If the alteration
occurs in consciousness, important personal events cannot be recalled. If it
occurs in identity, either the individual's customary identity is temporarily
forgotten and a new identity is assumed, or the customary feeling of one's own
reality is lost and replaced by a feeling of unreality. If the alteration occurs in
motor behavior, there is also a concurrent disturbance in consciousness or
identity, as in the wandering that occurs during a Psychogenic Fugue.
    Depersonalization Disorder has been included in the Dissociative Disorders
because the feeling of one's own reality, an important component of identity, is
lost. Some, however, question this inclusion because disturbance in memory is
absent.
    Although Sleepwalking Disorder has the essential feature of a Dissociative
Disorder, it is classified among the Disorders Usually First Evident in Infancy,
Childhood, or Adolescence.

300.12 Psychogenic Amnesia
The essential feature is a sudden inability to recall important personal informa-
tion, an inability not due to an Organic Mental Disorder. The extent of the
disturbance is too great to be explained by ordinary forgetfulness. The diag-
nosis is not made if the person travels to another locale and assumes a new
identity, in which case the diagnosis is Psychogenic Fugue.
    There are four types of disturbance in recall. In localized (or circumscribed)
amnesia, the most common type, there is failure to recall all events occurring
during a circumscribed period of time, usually the first few hours following a
profoundly disturbing event. For example, the uninjured survivor of a car
accident which killed his immediate family cannot recall anything that hap-
pened from the time of the accident until two days later. Somewhat less
common is selective amnesia, a failure to recall some, but not all, of the events
occurring during a circumscribed period of time. In the illustration above, the
uninjured survivor might recall making the funeral arrangements, but not recall
extensive simultaneous discussions with family members. The least common
types of disturbance in recall are generalized amnesia, in which failure of recall
encompasses the individual's entire life, and continuous amnesia, in which the
 individual cannot recall events subsequent to a specific time up to and including
the present.
    During an ongoing amnestic episode, perplexity, disorientation, and pur-
 poseless wandering may occur. When the period of time for which there is
 amnesia is in the past, the person is usually aware of the disturbance in recall.

                                253


254 Diagnostic Categories

    Associated features. During the amnestic period there may be indifference
toward the memory disturbance. Post-traumatic Stress Disorder may also be
present.

    Age at onset and sex ratio. Military sources provide many clinical reports
describing the disorder in young males during war. The disorder is most often
observed in adolescent and young adult females, but rarely in the elderly.

    Course and predisposing factors. Amnesia begins suddenly, usually follow-
ing severe psychosocial stress. The stress often involves a threat of physical
injury or death. In other instances the stress is due to the unacceptability of
 certain impulses or acts, such as an extramarital affair. In still other instances
 the individual may be in a subjectively intolerable life situation, such as aban-
donment by a spouse.
    Termination of the amnesia is typically abrupt. Recovery is complete and
recurrences are rare.

    Impairment. The degree of impairment varies from mild to severe in pro-
 portion to the duration of the amnestic episode and the importance of forgotten
 events to the individual's social functioning. The impairment is usually minimal
 and temporary, since rapid recovery is the rule.

     Complications. None.

     Prevalence. The condition is apparently rare under normal circumstances;
 it is more common in wartime or during natural disasters.

     Familial pattern. No information.

     Differential diagnosis. In Organic Mental Disorders there is usually a mem-
 ory disturbance whose onset has no relationship to stress and that is more
 marked for recent than for remote events. Memory impairment caused by
 organic factors usually disappears very slowly, if at all; full return of memory
 is rare. Furthermore, attention deficits, a clouding of consciousness, and dis-
 turbances of affect are frequently present.
     In Substance-induced Intoxication there can be "blackouts" with failure to
 recall events that occurred during the intoxication. The organic factor (the sub-
 stance taken) and the failure to achieve full return of memory clearly distinguish
 it from Psychogenic Amnesia.
     In Alcohol Amnestic Disorder, short-term (not immediate) memory is im-
 paired, i.e., events can be recalled immediately after they occur, but not after
 the passage of a few minutes. This type of memory disturbance is not seen in
 Psychogenic Amnesia. In addition, blunted affect, confabulation, and lack of
 awareness of the memory impairment are common in Alcohol Amnestic Dis-
 order.
     In postconcussion amnesia, the disturbance of recall, though circumscribed,


                                           Dissociative Disorders 255

is often retrograde, encompassing a period of time before the head trauma,
whereas in Psychogenic Amnesia the disturbance of recall is almost always
anterograde. Retrograde amnesia following head trauma can usually be dis-
tinguished from Psychogenic Amnesia by diagnostic use of hypnosis or an
amytal interview; prompt recovery of the lost memories suggests a psychogenic
basis for the disturbance.
    In epilepsy, the memory impairment is sudden in onset, motor abnormali-
 ties are usually present during the episode, and repeated EEGs typically reveal
anomalies.
    In catatonic stupor, mutism may suggest Psychogenic Amnesia, but failure
of recall is nearly always absent, and there usually are other characteristic cata-
tonic symptoms, such as rigidity, posturing, and negativism.
    Malingering involving simulated amnesia presents a particularly difficult
diagnostic dilemma. Attention to the possibility that the amnesia is feigned plus
careful questioning under hypnosis or during an amytal interview should help
to resolve the dilemma.

   Diagnostic criteria lor Psychogenic Amnesia
  A. Sudden inability to recall important personal information that is too
  extensive to be explained by ordinary forgetfulness.

  B. The disturbance is not due to an Organic Mental Disorder (e.g.,
  blackouts during Alcohol Intoxication),

300.13 Psychogenic Fugue
The essential feature is sudden, unexpected travel away from home or custom-
ary work locale with assumption of a new identity and an inability to recall
one's previous identity. Perplexity and disorientation may occur. Following
recovery there is no recollection of events that took place during the fugue. The
diagnosis is not made in the presence of an Organic Mental Disorder.
    In some cases the disorder may be manifested by the assumption of a
completely new identity during the fugue, usually marked by more gregarious
and uninhibited traits than characterized the former personality, which typically
is quiet and altogether ordinary. In such instances the individual may give
himself or herself a new name, take up a new residence, and engage in complex
social activities that are well-integrated and do not suggest the presence of a
mental disorder. In most cases, however, the fugue is less elaborate, and con-
sists of little more than brief, apparently purposeful travel. Social contacts in
these cases are minimal or even avoided; the new identity, while present, is
incomplete. Occasionally there are outbursts of violence against another person
or property. In all cases of fugue, however, the individual's travel and behavior
must appear more purposeful than the confused wandering that may be seen
in Psychogenic Amnesia.


 256 Diagnostic Categories

    Associated features. No information.

    Age at onset. Variable.

    Predisposing factors and course. Heavy alcohol use may predispose to the
development of the disorder. Psychogenic Fugue typically follows severe psycho-
social stress, such as marital quarrels, personal rejections, military conflict, or
natural disaster. Usually the fugue is of brief duration—hours to days—and
involves a limited amount of travel; more rarely, it continues for many months
and involves complex but unobtrusive travel over thousands of miles and across
numerous national borders. Ultimately, rapid recovery occurs; recurrences are
rare.

    Impairment. The degree of impairment varies with the duration of the fugue
and the extent to which it causes subsequent social distress to the individual and
his or her associates. When violent behavior has occurred, the social, legal, and
other personal sequelae depend on the nature of the violent act. In most cases
impairment is minimal and transient.

    Complications. None.

    Prevalence. Although apparently rare, the disorder is most common in
wartime, or in the wake of a natural disaster.

    Sex ratio and familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. Organic Mental Disorders usually involve a dis-
 turbance of memory more marked for recent than for remote events; the
 memory disturbance is not isolated and disappears slowly, if at all; memory
 rarely is fully restored. Disturbances of attention, clouding of consciousness,
 and affective disturbances are usually present but unexpected travel is unusual.
 If travel occurs as part of an Organic Mental Disorder, it is usually not of a
 complex, purposive, or socially adaptive nature and appears to be mere wander-
 ing.
    When temporal lobe epilepsy involves travel, motoric activity is usually
 simple rather than complex and there is no assumption of a new identity. Affect
 is dysphoric. Typically, temporal lobe epilepsy is not precipitated by psycho-
 social stress.
    In Psychogenic Amnesia, sudden failure to recall important personal events,
 including one's personal identity, occurs; but purposeful travel and the assump-
 tion of a new identity, partial or complete, are not present.
    Malingering, in which there is feigned inability to recall one's previous
 activity and identity, is exceedingly difficult to distinguish from Psychogenic
 Fugue. Careful questioning under hypnosis or during an amytal interview can
be useful.


                                           Dissociative Disorders 257

   Diagnostic criteria lor Psychogenic Fugue
   A. Sudden unexpected travel away from one's home or customary place
   of work, with inability to recall one's past.

   B. Assumption of a new identity-(partial or complete),

   C The disturbance is not due to an Organic Mental Disorder.

 300.14 Multiple Personality
 The essential feature is the existence within the individual of two or more
 distinct personalities, each of which is dominant at a particular time. Each
 personality is a fully integrated and complex unit with unique memories, be-
 havior patterns, and social relationships that determine the nature of the indi-
 vidual's acts when that personality is dominant. Transition from one personality
 to another is sudden and often associated with psychosocial stress.
    Usually the original personality has no knowledge or awareness of the
 existence of any of the other personalities (subpersonalities). When there are
 more than two subpersonalities in one individual, each is aware of the others
 to varying degrees. The subpersonalities may not know each other or be
constant companions. At any given moment one personality will interact ver-
bally with the external environment, but none or any number of the other
personalities may actively perceive (i.e., "listen in on") all that is going on.
    The original personality and all of the subpersonalities are aware of lost
periods of time. "They" will usually admit to this if asked, but will seldom
volunteer this information.
    The individual personalities are nearly always quite discrepant and fre-
quently seem to be opposites. For example, a quiet, retiring spinster may alter-
nate with a flamboyant, promiscuous bar habitue on certain nights. Usually one
of the personalities over the course of the disorder is dominant.

    Associated features. One or more of the personalities may function with a
reasonable degree of adaptation (e.g., be gainfully employed) while alternating
with another personality that is clearly maladapted or has a specific, separate,
mental disorder. Studies have demonstrated that various subpersonalities in the
same individual may have different responses to physiological and psychological
measurements.
    One or more of the subpersonalities may report being of the opposite sex,
of a different race or age, or from a different family than the original personal-
ity. Each subpersonality, however, displays behaviors characteristic of its stated
age, which is usually younger than the actual age.
    One or more of the personalities may be aware of hearing or having heard
the voice(s) of one or more of the other personalities or may report having
talked with or engaged in activities with one or more of the other personalities.
These internal conversations and the belief that one has engaged in activities
with another personality when the latter is actually a dissociated aspect of the


 258 Diagnostic Categories

 original personality must be differentiated from other forms of hallucinatory
and delusional experiences.
    The subpersonalities often exist in groups of two or three, all of whom
 represent the same period of life (e.g., adolescence). When this occurs, one or
 more of these subpersonalities tends to have the role of protector of another
 member(s) of the group.
     Psychosocial stress most often precipitates the transition from one person-
 ality to another; hypnosis may also effect this change. Usually transitions occur
 in a dramatic manner.
     Most often, the subpersonalities have proper names, usually different from
 the first name, and sometimes from both the first and last names, of the original
 personality. Occasionally one or more subpersonalities are unnamed.
     Somatoform Disorders and Psychological Factors Affecting Physical Condi-
 tion apparently are common in individuals with Multiple Personality.

     Age at onset. Onset of Multiple Personality may be in early childhood or
 later. The disorder is rarely diagnosed until adolescence.

     Course. The course tends to be more chronic than in the other Dissociative
 Disorders.

     Impairment. The degree of impairment varies from moderate to severe,
 depending on the number, nature, and persistence of the various subpersonali-
 ties. Impairment is greater than in the other Dissociative Disorders and recovery
 typically is less complete.

     Complications. Transient psychotic episodes, Psychosexual Disorders and
 Disorders of Impulse Control Not Elsewhere Classified, may be complications.

     Predisposing factors. Child abuse and other forms of severe emotional
 trauma in childhood may be predisposing factors.

     Prevalence. The disorder is apparently extremely rare.

     Sex ratio. Multiple Personality is most often diagnosed in late adolescent
 and young adult females.

     Familial pattern. No information.

     Differential diagnosis. Psychogenic Fugue and Psychogenic Amnesia may
 be confused with Multiple Personality, but do not present its characteristic
 repeated shifts of identity and usually are limited to a single, brief episode.
 Also, in both Psychogenic Amnesia and Psychogenic Fugue, awareness of the
 original personality is absent. Complex social activities, memories, behavior
 patterns, and friendships are not present in Psychogenic Amnesia and are
 uncommon in Psychogenic Fugue.


                                           Dissociative Disorders 259

     Psychotic disorders such as Schizophrenic Disorders may be confused with
 Multiple Personality because the individual reports hearing or talking with the
 voices of other personalities.
     Malingering can present a difficult diagnostic dilemma. The presence of
 secondary gain suggests Malingering. Hypnosis or amytal interview may be of
 help in resolving especially difficult cases.

   Diagnostic criteria for Multiple Personality
   A. The existence within the individual of two or more distinct per-
   sonalities, each of Which is dominant at a particular time.

   B. The personality that is dominant at any particular time determines the
   individual's behavior.

   C Each individual personality is complex and integrated with its own
   unique behavior patterns and social relationships.

 300.60 Depersonalization Disorder
 The essential feature is the occurrence of one or more episodes of depersonaliza-
 tion that cause social or occupational impairment. The diagnosis is not made
 when the symptom of depersonalization is secondary to any other disorder.
 (Mild depersonalization, without significant impairment, is estimated to occur at
 some time in 30%-70% of young adults.)
    The symptom of depersonalization involves an alteration in the perception
 or experience of the self so that the usual sense of one's own reality is tempo-
 rarily lost or changed. This is manifested by a sensation of self-estrangement
 or unreality, which may include the feeling that one's extremities have changed
in size, or the experience of seeming to perceive oneself from a distance. In
 addition, the individual may feel "mechanical" or as though in a dream. Various
 types of sensory anesthesias and a feeling of not being in complete control of
one's actions, including speech, are often present. All of these feelings are ego-
dystonic, and the individual maintains grossly intact reality testing.
    The onset of depersonalization is rapid; its disappearance is more gradual.

    Associated features. Derealization is frequently present. This is manifested
by a strange alteration in the perception of one's surroundings so that a sense
of the reality of the external world is lost. A perceived change in the size or
shape of objects in the external world is common. People may be perceived as
dead or mechanical.
    Other common associated features include dizziness, depression, obsessive
ruminations, anxiety, fear of going insane, and a disturbance in the subjective
 sense of time. There is often the feeling that recall is difficult or slow.

    Age at onset. The disorder usually begins in adolescence. Onset after the
age of forty is extremely rare.


 260 Diagnostic Categories

    Course. The course is generally chronic and marked by remissions and
exacerbations. Most often the exacerbations occur when there is mild anxiety or
depression.

    Impairment. The degree of impairment is usually minimal, but may be
exacerbated by the presence of associated features such as anxiety or fear of
insanity.

    Complications. Hypochondriasis may be a complication of this disorder.

    Predisposing factors. Fatigue, recovery from Substance Intoxication, hyp-
nosis, meditation, physical pain, anxiety, depression, and severe stress, such as
military combat or an auto accident, predispose to episodes of Depersonalization
Disorder.

    Prevalence, familial pattern, and sex ratio. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. The symptom of depersonalization, even if recurrent,
that does not cause any social or occupational impairment, must be distinguished
from Depersonalization Disorder.
    In Schizophrenia, Affective Disorders, Organic Mental Disorders (especially
Intoxication or Withdrawal), Anxiety Disorders, Personality Disorders, and
epilepsy, depersonalization may be a symptom. In such cases, the additional diag-
nosis of Depersonalization Disorder is not made.

  Diagnostic criteria for Depersonalization Disorder
  A. One or more episodes of depersonalization sufficient to produce
  significant Impairment in social or occupational functioning.

  B. The symptom is not due to any other disorder, such as Schizophrenia,
  Affective Disorder, Organic Mental Disorder, Anxiety Disorder, or
  epilepsy.

300.15 Atypical Dissociative Disorder
This is a residual category to be used for individuals who appear to have a
Dissociative Disorder but do not satisfy the criteria for a specific Dissociative
Disorder. Examples include trance-like states, derealization unaccompanied by
depersonalization, and those more prolonged dissociated states that may occur
in persons who have been subjected to periods of prolonged and intense co-
ercive persuasion (brainwashing, thought reform, and indoctrination while the
captive of terrorists or cultists).


                     Psychosexual Disorders


The name for this diagnostic class emphasizes that psychological factors are
assumed to be of major etiological significance in the development of the dis-
orders listed here. Disorders of sexual functioning that are caused exclusively by
organic factors, even though they may have psychological consequences, are
not listed in this classification. For example, impotence due to spinal-cord injury
is coded on Axis III as a physical disorder, and the psychological reaction to
that condition could be coded as an Adjustment Disorder, or some other suitable
category, on Axis I.
    The Psychosexual Disorders are divided into four groups. The Gender
Identity Disorders are characterized by the individual's feelings of discomfort
and inappropriateness about his or her anatomic sex and by persistent behaviors
generally associated with the other sex. The Paraphilias are characterized by
arousal in response to sexual objects or situations that are not part of normative
arousal-activity patterns and that in varying degrees may interfere with the
capacity for reciprocal affectionate sexual activity. The Psychosexual Dysfunc-
tions are characterized by inhibitions in sexual desire or the psychophysiological
changes that characterize the sexual response cycle. Finally, there is a residual
class of Other Psychosexual Disorders that has two categories: Ego-dystonic
Homosexuality and a final residual category, Psychosexual Disorders Not Else-
where Classified.

GENDER IDENTITY DISORDERS
The essential feature of the disorders included in this subclass is an incongruence
between anatomic sex and gender identity. Gender identity is the sense of
knowing to which sex one belongs, that is, the awareness that "I am a male/'
or "I am a female." Gender identity is the private experience of gender role, and
gender role is the public expression of gender identity. Gender role can be
defined as everything that one says and does, including sexual arousal, to indi-
cate to others or to the self the degree to which one is male or female.
    Disturbance in gender identity is rare, and should not be confused with
the far more common phenomena of feelings of inadequacy in fulfilling the
expectations associated with one's gender role. An example would be an indi-
vidual who perceives himself or herself as being sexually unattractive yet
experiences himself or herself unambiguously as a man or woman in accordance
with his or her anatomic sex.

302.5x Transsexualism
The essential features of this heterogeneous disorder are a persistent sense of
discomfort and inappropriateness about one's anatomic sex and a persistent wish

                                261


262 Diagnostic Categories

to be rid of one's genitals and to live as a member of the other sex. The diag-
nosis is made only if the disturbance has been continuous (not limited to periods
of stress) for at least two years, is not due to another mental disorder, such as
Schizophrenia, and is not associated with physical intersex or genetic abnormal-
ity.
    Individuals with this disorder usually complain that they are uncomfortable
wearing the clothes of their own anatomic sex; frequently this discomfort leads
to cross-dressing (dressing in clothes of the other sex). Often they choose to
engage in activities that in our culture tend to be associated with the other sex.
These individuals often find their genitals repugnant, which may lead to per-
sistent requests for sex reassignment by surgical or hormonal means.
    To varying degrees, the behavior, dress, and mannerisms are those of the
other sex. With cross-dressing, hormonal treatment, and electrolysis, a few males
with the disorder will appear relatively indistinguishable from members of the
other sex. However, the anatomic sex of most males and females with the dis-
order is quite apparent to the alert observer.

    Associated features. Generally there is moderate to severe coexisting per-
sonality disturbance. Frequently there is considerable anxiety and depression,
which the individual may attribute to inability to live in the role of the desired
sex.

    Course and subtypes. The disorder is subdivided according to the pre-
dominant prior sexual history, which is coded in the fifth digit as 1 = asexual,
2 = homosexual (same anatomic sex), 3 = heterosexual (opposite anatomic
sex), and 0 = unspecified. In the first, "asexual," the individual reports never
having had strong sexual feelings. Often there is the additional history of little or
no sexual activity or pleasure derived from the genitals. In the second group,
"homosexual," a predominantly homosexual (object choice is same anatomic sex)
arousal pattern preceding the onset of the Transsexualism is acknowledged,
although often such individuals will deny that the behavior is homosexual be-
cause of their conviction that they are "really" of the other sex. In the third
group, "heterosexual," the individual claims to have had an active heterosexual
life.
    Without treatment, the course of all three types is chronic and unremitting.
Since surgical sex reassignment is a recent development, the long-term course of
the disorder with this treatment is unknown.
    Individuals who have female-to-male Transsexualism appear to represent a
more homogeneous group than those who have male-to-female Transsexualism
in that they are more likely to have a history of homosexuality and to have a
more stable course, with or without treatment.

    Age at onset. Individuals who develop Transsexualism often evidenced
gender identity problems as children. However, some assert that although they
were secretly aware of their gender problem, it was not evident to their family
and friends. The age at which the full syndrome appears for those with the
"asexual" or "homosexual" course is most often in late adolescence or early


                                          Psychosexual Disorders63

 adult life. In individuals with the "heterosexual" course, the disorder may have
 a later onset.
     Impairment and complications. Frequently social and occupational function-
 ing are markedly impaired, partly because of associated psychopathology and
 partly because of problems encountered in attempting to live in the desired
 gender role. Depression is common, and can lead to suicide attempts. In rare
 instances males may mutilate their genitals.
     Predisposing factors. Extensive, pervasive, childhood femininity in a boy or
 childhood masculinity in a girl increases the likelihood of Transsexualism.
 Transsexualism seems always to develop in the context of a disturbed parent-
 child relationship. Some cases of Transvestism evolve into Transsexualism.
     Prevalence. The disorder is apparently rare.
     Sex ratio. Males are more common than females among people who seek
 help at clinics specializing in the treatment of this disorder. The ratio varies from
 as high as 8:1 to as low as 2:1.
     Familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. In effeminate homosexuality the individual displays
 behaviors characteristic of the opposite sex. However, such individuals have no
 desire to be of the other anatomic sex. In physical intersex the individual may
have a disturbance in gender identity. However, the presence of abnormal sexual
 structures rules out the diagnosis of Transsexualism.
    Other individuals with a disturbed gender identity may, in isolated periods
 of stress, wish to belong to the other sex and to be rid of their own genitals.
In such cases the diagnosis Atypical Gender Identity Disorder should be con-
 sidered, since the diagnosis of Transsexualism is made only when the disturbance
has been continuous for at least two years. In Schizophrenia, there may be delu-
 sions of belonging to the other sex, but this is rare. The insistence by an indi-
vidual with Transsexualism that he or she is of the other sex is, strictly speaking,
not a delusion since what is invariably meant is that the individual feels like a
member of the other sex rather than a true belief that he or she is a member of
the other sex.
    In both Transvestism and Transsexualism there may be cross-dressing.
However, in Transvestism that has not evolved into Transsexualism there is no
wish to be rid of one's own genitals.

  Diagnostic criteria for Transsexualism
  A. Sense of discomfort and inappropriateness about one's anatomic lex.

   8. Wish to be rid of one's own genitals and to live as a member of the
  other sex.

  C, The disturbance has been continuous (not limited to periods of stress)
  for at least two years.


264 Diagnostic Categories

   D. Absence of physical intersex or genetic abnormality.

  E. Not due to another mental disorder, such as Schizophrenia.

Fifth-digit code numbers and subclassification. The predominant prior sexual
history is recorded in the fifth digit as:
    1 = asexual
    2 = homosexual (same anatomic sex)
    3 = heterosexual (other anatomic sex)
    0 = unspecified

302.60 Gender Identity Disorder of Childhood
The essential features are a persistent feeling of discomfort and inappropriate-
ness in a child about his or her anatomic sex and the desire to be, or insistence
 that he or she is, of the other sex. In addition, there is a persistent repudiation
of the individual's own anatomic attributes. This is not merely the rejection of
stereotypical sex role behavior as, for example, in "tomboyishness" in girls or
"sissyish"' behavior in boys, but rather a profound disturbance of the normal
 sense of maleness or femaleness.
    Girls with this disorder regularly have male peer groups, an avid interest
 in sports and rough-and-tumble play, and a lack of interest in playing with dolls
 or playing "house" (unless playing the father or another male role). More
 rarely, a girl with this disorder claims that she will grow up to become a man
 (not merely in role), that she is biologically unable to become pregnant, that
 she will not develop breasts, or that she has, or will grow, a penis.
    Boys with this disorder invariably are preoccupied with female stereotypical
 activities. They may have a preference for dressing in girls' or women's clothes,
 or may improvise such items from available material when genuine articles are
 unavailable. (The cross-dressing never causes sexual excitement.) They often
 have a compelling desire to participate in the games and pastimes of girls. Dolls
 are often the favorite toy, and girls are regularly the preferred playmates.
 When playing "house," the role of a female is typically adopted. Rough-and-
 tumble play or sports are regularly avoided. Gestures and actions are often
 judged against a standard of cultural stereotype to be feminine, and the boy is
 invariably subjected to male peer group teasing and rejection, which rarely
 occurs among girls until adolescence. In rare cases a boy with this disorder
 claims that his penis or testes are disgusting or will disappear, or that it
 would be better not to have a penis or testes.
     Some children refuse to attend school because of teasing or pressure to
 dress in attire stereotypical of their sex. Most children with this disorder deny
 being disturbed by it except as it brings them into conflict with the expectations
 of their family or peers.

     Associated features. Some of these children, particularly girls, show no


                                          Psychosexual Disorders65

other signs of psychopathology. Others may display serious signs of disturbance,
such as phobias and persistent nightmares.

    Age at onset and course. Three-fourths of the boys who cross-dress begin
to do so before their fourth birthday; playing with dolls begins during the
same period. Social ostracism increases during the early grades of school, and
social conflict is significant at about age seven or eight. During the later grade-
school years, grossly feminine behavior may lessen. An as yet undetermined
proportion of boys, perhaps one-third to one-half, become aware of a homo-
sexual orientation during adolescence.
    For females the age at onset is also early, but most begin to acquiesce to
social pressure during late childhood or adolescence and give up an exaggerated
insistence on male activities and attire. A minority retain a masculine identifica-
tion and some of these develop a homosexual arousal pattern.
    Complications. In a small number of cases, the disorder becomes continuous
with Transsexualism.
    Impairment. Peer relations with members of the same sex are absent or dif-
ficult to establish. The amount of impairment varies from none to extreme, and
is related to the degree of underlying psychopathology and the reaction of peers
and family to the individual's behavior.
    Prevalence. The disorder is apparently rare.
    Sex ratio and familial pattern. No information.
    Predisposing factors. Extreme, excessive, and prolonged physical and emo-
tional closeness between the infant and the mother and a relative absence of the
father during the earliest years may contribute to the development of this
disorder in the male. Females who later develop this disorder have mothers who
were apparently unavailable to them at a very early age, either psychologically
or physically, because of illness or abandonment; the girl seems to make a com-
pensatory identification with the father, which leads to the adoption of a male
gender identity.
    Differential diagnosis. Children whose behavior merely does not fit the
cultural stereotype of masculinity or femininity should not be given this diagnosis
unless the full syndrome is present. Physical abnormalities of the sex organs
are rarely associated with Gender Identity Disorder; when they are present,
the physical disorder should be noted on Axis III.

  Diagnostic criteria for Gender Identity Disorder of Childhood
  For females;

  A. Strongly and persistently stated desire to be a boy, or insistence that
  she is a boy (not merely a desire for any perceived cultural advantages
  from being a boy).


266 Diagnostic Categories

  B. Persistent repudiation of female anatomic structures, as manifested
  by at least one of the following repeated assertions:

      (1) that she will grow up to become a man (not merely in role)
      (2) that she is biologically unable to become pregnant
      (3) that she will not develop breasts
      (4) that she has no vagina
      (5) that she has, or will grow, a penis

  C Onset of the disturbance before puberty. (For adults and adolescents,
  see Atypical Gender Identity Disorder.)

  For males:
  A. Strongly and persistently stated desire to be a girl, or insistence that
  he is a girl.

  B. Either (1) or (2):

      (1) persistent repudiation of male anatomic structures, as mani-
      fested by at least one of the following repeated assertions:
          (a) that he will grow up to become a woman, (not merely in
          role)
          (b) that his penis or testes are disgusting or will disappear
          (c) that it would be better not to have a penis or testes
      (2) preoccupation with female stereotypical activities as manifested
      by a preference for either cross-dressing or simulating female attire,
      or by a compelling desire to participate in the games and pastimes of
      girls

  C. Onset of the disturbance before puberty, (For adults and adolescents,
  see Atypical Gender Identity Disorder.)

302.85 Atypical Gender Identity Disorder
This is a residual category for coding disorders in gender identity that are
not classifiable as a specific Gender Identity Disorder.

PARAPHILIAS
The essential feature of disorders in this subclass is that unusual or bizarre
imagery or acts are necessary for sexual excitement. Such imagery or acts tend
to be insistently and involuntarily repetitive and generally involve either: (1)
preference for use of a nonhuman object for sexual arousal, (2) repetitive sexual
activity with humans involving real or simulated suffering or humiliation, or
(3) repetitive sexual activity with nonconsenting partners. In other classifications
these disorders are referred to as Sexual Deviations. The term Paraphilia is


                                          Psychosexual Disorders267 267

preferable because it correctly emphasizes that the deviation (para) is in that to
which the individual is attracted (philia).
    The imagery in a Paraphilia, such as simulated bondage, may be playful
and harmless and acted out with a mutually consenting partner. More likely it
is not reciprocated by the partner, who consequently feels erotically excluded or
superfluous to some degree. In more extreme form, paraphiliac imagery is
acted out with a nonconsenting partner, and is noxious and injurious to the
partner (as in severe Sexual Sadism) or to the self (as in Sexual Masochism).
    Since paraphiliac imagery is necessary for erotic arousal, it must be included
in masturbatory or coital fantasies, if not actually acted out alone or with a
partner and supporting cast or paraphernalia. In the absence of paraphiliac
imagery there is no relief from nonerotic tension, and sexual excitement or
orgasm is not attained.
    The imagery in a paraphiliac fantasy or the object of sexual excitement in a
Paraphilia is frequently the stimulus for sexual excitement in individuals without
a Psychosexual Disorder. For example, women's undergarments and imagery of
sexual coercion are sexually exciting for many men; they are paraphiliac only
when they become necessary for sexual excitement.
    The Paraphilias included here are, by and large, conditions that traditionally
have been specifically identified by previous classifications. Some of them are
 extremely rare; others are relatively common. Because some of these disorders
 are associated with nonconsenting partners, they are of legal and social sig-
 nificance. Individuals with these disorders tend not to regard themselves as ill,
 and usually come to the attention of mental health professionals only when
 their behavior has brought them into conflict with society.
     The specific Paraphilias described here are: (1) Fetishism, (2) Transvestism,
 (3) Zoophilia, (4) Pedophilia, (5) Exhibitionism, (6) Voyeurism, (7) Sexual Mas-
 ochism, and (8) Sexual Sadism. Finally, there is a residual category, Atypical
 Paraphilia, for noting the many other Paraphilias that exist but that have not
 been sufficiently described to date to warrant inclusion as specific categories.
     Paraphilias may be multiple or may coexist with other mental disorders,
 such as Schizophrenia or various Personality Disorders. In such cases multiple
 diagnoses should be made.

     Associated features. Frequently these individuals assert that the behavior
 causes them no distress and that their only problem is the reaction of others to
 their behavior. Others admit to guilt, shame, and depression at having to engage
 in an unusual sexual activity that is socially unacceptable. There is often impair-
 ment in the capacity for reciprocal affectionate sexual activity, and psychosexual
 dysfunctions are common. Personality disturbances, particularly emotional im-
 maturity, are also frequent.

     Impairment. Social and sexual relationships may suffer if others, such as a
 spouse (many of these individuals are married), become aware of the unusual
 sexual behavior. In addition, if the individual engages in sexual activity with a
 partner who refuses to cooperate in the unusual behavior, such as fetishistic or
 sadistic behavior, sexual excitement may be inhibited and the relationship may


 268 Diagnostic Categories

suffer. In rare instances the unusual behavior may become the major activity
in the individual's life, such as the collection of fetishes or voyeuristic acts.

    Complications. In Zoophilia physical harm may result from sexual activity
 with animals. In Sexual Masochism, the individual may inflict serious physical
 damage on himself or herself. Paraphilias involving another person, particularly
 Voyeurism, Exhibitionism, and Pedophilia, often lead to arrest and incarceration.
 Sexual offenses against children constitute a significant proportion of all reported
 criminal sex acts. Individuals with Exhibitionism make up about one-third of all
 apprehended sex offenders.

    Predisposing factors. With the exception of Transvestism (see p. 269), pre-
 disposing factors are unknown.

     Prevalence. The disorders are apparently rare.

     Sex ratio. Virtually all reported cases have been in males, with the ex-
 ception of Sexual Sadism and Sexual Masochism, which, however, occur far
 more commonly in males. Although no cases of Voyeurism in women have been
 reported in the literature, some clinicians claim to know of such cases.

     Familial pattern. No information.

 302.81 Fetishism
 The essential feature is the use of nonliving objects (fetishes) as a repeatedly
 preferred or exclusive method of achieving sexual excitement. The diagnosis is
 not made when the fetishes are limited to articles of female clothing used in
 cross-dressing, as in Transvestism, or when the object is sexually stimulating be-
 cause it has been designed for that purpose, e.g., a vibrator.
     Sexual activity may involve the fetish alone, such as masturbation into a
 shoe, or the fetish may be integrated into sexual activities with a human partner.
 In the latter situation the fetish is required or strongly preferred for sexual
 excitement, and in its absence there may be erectile failure in males.
     Fetishes tend to be articles of clothing, such as female undergarments, shoes,
 and boots, or, more rarely, parts of the human body, such as hair or nails. The
 fetish is often associated with someone with whom the individual was intimately
 involved during childhood, most often a caretaker.

     Age at onset. Usually the disorder begins by adolescence, although the
 fetish may have been endowed with special significance earlier, in childhood.
 Once established, the disorder tends to be chronic.

     Differential diagnosis. Nonpathological sexual experimentation can involve
 sexual arousal by nonhuman objects, but this stimulus for sexual excitement
 is neither persistently preferred nor required.
     In Transvestism the sexual arousal is limited to articles of female clothing
 used in cross-dressing. Although Transvestism could be considered fetishistic
 cross-dressing, the additional diagnosis of Fetishism should not be made.


                                          Psychosexual Disorders269 269

   Diagnostic criteria for Fetishism
   A. The use of nonliving objects (fetishes) is a repeatedly preferred or
   exclusive method of achieving sexual excitement

   B. The fetishes are not limited to articles of female clothing used in
   cross-dressing (Transvestism) or to objects designed to be used for the
   purpose of sexual stimulation (e.g., vibrator).

 302.30 Transvestism
 The essential feature is recurrent and persistent cross-dressing by a hetero-
 sexual male that during at least the initial phase of the illness is for the purpose
of sexual excitement. Interference with the cross-dressing results in intense
frustration. This diagnosis is not made in those rare instances in which the dis-
 turbance has evolved into Transsexualism.
    Transvestic phenomena range from occasional solitary wearing of female
 clothes to extensive involvement in a transvestic subculture. Usually more than
 one article of women's clothing is involved, and the man may dress entirely as a
 woman. The degree to which the cross-dressed individual appears as a woman
 varies, depending on mannerisms, body habitus, and cross-dressing skill. When
 not cross-dressed, he is usually unremarkably masculine. Although the basic
 preference is heterosexual, rarely has the individual had sexual experience with
 several women, and occasional homosexual acts may occur.
    Age at onset and course. Cross-dressing typically begins in childhood or
 early adolescence. In some cases the cross-dressing is not done in public until
 adulthood. The initial experience may involve partial or total cross-dressing;
when it is partial, it often progresses to total. A favored article of clothing may
become erotic in itself and may habitually be used first in masturbation, and
later in intercourse. In some individuals sexual arousal by the clothing tends to
 disappear, although the cross-dressing continues as an antidote to anxiety. Cross-
dressing, although intermittent in the beginning, often becomes more frequent,
and may become habitual. A small number of individuals with Transvestism, as
the years pass, want to dress and live permanently as women, and the disorder
may evolve into Transsexualism.
    Predisposing factors. According to the folklore of individuals with this con-
dition, a "petticoat punishment," the punishment of humiliating a boy by dress-
ing him in the clothes of a girl, is common in the history of individuals who later
develop this disorder.
    Differential diagnosis. In Transsexualism there is a persistent wish to be
rid of one's own genitals and to live as a member of the other sex, and there is
never any sexual excitement with cross-dressing. The individual with Trans-
vestism considers himself to be basically male, whereas the anatomically male
Transsexual has a female sexual identity. In those rare instances when Trans-
vestism evolves into Transsexualism, the diagnosis of Transvestism is changed
to Transsexualism.


270 Diagnostic Categories

    Cross-dressing for the relief of tension or gender discomfort may be done
without directly causing sexual excitement. This should not be diagnosed as
Transvestism; the diagnosis of Atypical Gender Identity Disorder should be
considered. In male homosexuality there may be occasional cross-dressing to
attract another male or to masquerade in theatrical fashion as a woman. How-
ever, the act of cross-dressing does not cause sexual arousal. In female im-
personators, unless Transvestism is also present, the act of cross-dressing does
not cause sexual arousal, and interference with the cross-dressing does not
result in intense frustration.
    Fetishism is not diagnosed when sexual arousal by nonhuman objects is
limited to articles of female clothing used in cross-dressing.

  Diagnostic criteria for Transvestism
  A. Recurrent and persistent cross-dressing by a heterosexual male.

  B. Use of cross-dressing for the purpose of sexual excitement, at least
  initially in the course of the disorder.

  C Intense frustration when the cross-dressing is interfered with.

  D. Does not meet the criteria for Transsexualism.

302.10 Zoophilia
The essential feature is the use of animals as a repeatedly preferred or exclu-
sive method of achieving sexual excitement. The animal may be the object of
intercourse or may be trained to sexually excite the human partner by licking
or rubbing. Usually the preferred animal is one with which the individual had
contact during childhood, such as a household pet or farm animal. The animal
is preferred no matter what other forms of sexual outlet are available.

    Age at onset. No information.

    Course. Initially in the course of the disorder there may also be sexual
arousal by humans. As time progresses, however, the animal becomes the most
powerful sexual stimulus. This usually occurs by early adulthood and the course
then becomes chronic.

    Differential diagnosis. Nonpathological sexual activity with animals may
occur because of the unavailability of suitable human partners or as a form of
sexual experimentation. In such instances the use of animals is not the con-
sistently preferred method of achieving sexual excitement.

  Diagnostic criteria lor Zoophilia
  The act or fanlaisy of engaging in sexual activity with animals is a re-
  peatedly preferred or exclusive method of achieving sexual excitement,


                                          Psychosexual Disorders 271

302.20 Pedophilia
The essential feature is the act or fantasy of engaging in sexual activity with
prepubertal children as a repeatedly preferred or exclusive method of achieving
sexual excitement. The difference in age between the adult with this disorder
and the prepubertal child is arbitrarily set at ten years or more. For late adoles-
cents with the disorder, no precise age difference is specified; and clinical judg-
ment must be used, the sexual maturity of the child as well as the age difference
being taken into account.
    Adults with the disorder are oriented toward children of the other sex
twice as often as toward children of the same sex. The sexual behavior of these
two groups is different. Heterosexually oriented males tend to prefer eight-to-ten
year-old girls, the desired sexual activity usually being limited to looking or
touching. Most incidents are initiated by adults who are in the intimate inter-
personal environment of the child. Homosexually oriented males tend to prefer
slightly older children. The percentage of couples in this group who know each
other only casually is higher than in the heterosexually oriented group. Indi-
viduals with undifferentiated sexual object preference tend to prefer younger
children than either of the other two groups.
    Most individuals oriented homosexually have not been married, whereas
most individuals oriented heterosexually either have been or are married.

    Age at onset. The disorder may begin at any time in adulthood; most fre-
quently it begins in middle age.

    Course. The course is unknown, although homosexually oriented Pedo-
philia tends to be chronic. The severity of the condition often fluctuates with
psychosocial stress. The recidivism rate for homosexually oriented Pedophilia
is second only to that for Exhibitionism, and ranges from 13% to 28% of those
apprehended, roughly twice that of heterosexually oriented Pedophilia.

    Differential diagnosis. Isolated sexual acts with children do not warrant the
diagnosis of Pedophilia. Such acts may be precipitated by marital discord,
recent loss, or intense loneliness. In such instances the desire for sex with a
child may be understood as a substitute for a preferred but unavailable adult.
In Mental Retardation, Organic Personality Syndrome, Alcohol Intoxication, or
Schizophrenia there may be a decrease in impulse control, particularly in the
elderly, that in rare instances leads to isolated sexual acts with children. How-
ever, sexual activity with children is generally not the consistently preferred
method for achieving sexual excitement.
    In Exhibitionism exposure may be to a child, but the act is not a prelude
to further sexual activity with the child.
    Sexual Sadism may, in extremely rare instances, be associated with Pedo-
philia, in which case both diagnoses are warranted.

  Diagnostic criteria for Pedophilia
  A, The act or fantasy of engaging in sexual activity with prepuhertal chil-


 272 Diagnostic Categories

   dren is a repeatedly preferred or exclusive method of achieving sexual
   excitement,

   B. If the individual is an adult, the prepubertal children are at least ten
   years younger than the individual. If the individual is a late adolescent,
   no precise age difference is required, and clinical judgment must take
   into account the age difference as well as the sexual maturity of the child.

 302.40 Exhibitionism
 The essential feature is repetitive acts of exposing the genitals to an unsuspecting
 stranger for the purpose of achieving sexual excitement, with no attempt at
 further sexual activity with the stranger. The wish to surprise or shock the
 observer is often consciously perceived or close to conscious awareness, but
these individuals are usually not physically dangerous to the victim. Sometimes
the individual masturbates while exposing himself. The condition apparently
occurs only in males, and the victims are female children or adults.

    Age at onset and course. The disorder may first occur at any time from
preadolescence to middle age, although it rarely begins at either end of the age
spectrum. The peak age at onset is the middle 20s, with a smaller peak in mid-
puberty.
    Few arrests are made in the older age groups, which suggests that the
condition becomes less severe after age 40.

  Differential diagnosis. Repeated exposure without experiencing sexual excite-
ment from the act is engaged in by a small number of individuals. They should
not receive the diagnosis of Exhibitionism since it is likely that such individuals
suffer from another disorder.
    When exposure occurs in Pedophilia it is a prelude to sexual activity with
the child.

  Diagnostic criteria for Exhibitionism
      Repetitive acts of exposing the genitals to an unsuspecting stranger
  for the purpose of achieving sexual excitement, with no attempt at
  further sexual activity with the stranger.

302.82 Voyeurism
The essential feature is repetitive looking at unsuspecting people, usually strang-
ers, who are either naked, in the act of disrobing, or engaging in sexual activity,
as the repeatedly preferred or exclusive method of achieving sexual excitement.
The act of looking ("peeping") is for the purpose of achieving sexual excitement,
and no sexual activity with the person is sought. Orgasm, usually produced by
masturbation, may occur during the voyeuristic activity, or later in response to
the memory of what the individual has witnessed. Often these individuals enjoy
thinking about the observed individuals' being helpless and feeling humiliated if


                                      Psychosexual Disorders 273

they knew they were being seen. In its severe form, peeping constitutes the
exclusive form of sexual activity.

    Age at onset. The first voyeuristic act is likely to occur in early adulthood.

    Course. The course tends to be chronic.

    Differential diagnosis. Normal sexual activity often includes sexual ex-
citement from observing nudity, undressing, or sexual activity. However, it is
not with an unsuspecting partner, and it is usually a prelude to further sexual
activity. Watching pornography, filmed or live, causes sexual excitement. How-
ever, the people who are being observed are willingly in view, even though in
fantasy the observer may imagine (but knows better) that the people are un-
suspecting.

  Diagnostic criteria for Voyeurism
  A. The individual repeatedly observes unsuspecting people who are
  naked^ in the act of disrobing, or engaging in sexual activity and no
  sexual activity with the observed people is sought

  B. The observing is the repeatedly preferred or exclusive method of
  achieving sexual excitement

302.83 Sexual Masochism
The essential feature is sexual excitement produced in an individual by his
or her own suffering. The diagnosis of Sexual Masochism is warranted under
either of two conditions:
    (1) A preferred or exclusive mode of producing sexual excitement is to be
       humiliated, bound, beaten, or otherwise made to suffer.
    (2) The individual has intentionally participated in an activity in which he
       or she was physically harmed or his or her life was threatened in order
       to produce sexual excitement, which did occur. A single well-docu-
       mented episode is sufficient to make the diagnosis.
   Age at onset. Masochistic sexual fantasies are likely to have been present in
childhood. However, the age when masochistic activities with partners first
begin is variable, but is commonly by early adulthood.

   Course. The disorder is usually chronic. Self-mutilation, if engaged in,
is likely to be repeated. Some individuals with the disorder may for many years
engage in masochistic acts without a need to increase the potential for self-
harm. Others, however, either because of an increased need or a diminished
capacity for restraint, increase the severity of the masochistic acts over time, or
during periods of stress, which may result in death.

   Differential diagnosis. Masochistic fantasies of being bound, beaten, raped,


 274 Diagnostic Categories

 or otherwise humiliated may facilitate sexual excitement in some individuals;
without such fantasies, they find sexual arousal inadequate. The diagnosis of
 Sexual Masochism is made only if the individual engages in masochistic sexual
acts, not merely fantasies. (If the need for masochistic fantasies is considered
clinically significant, it may be diagnosed as Psychosexual Disorder Not Else-
where Classified.) Some individuals have experimented with bondage or have
occasionally experienced erotic excitement as a result of unintentionally having
been humiliated, but these situations are also not sufficient for diagnosing this
disorder. Masochistic personality traits, such as the need to be disappointed or
humiliated, are distinguished from Sexual Masochism by the fact that they are
not associated with sexual excitement.

  Diagnostic criteria for Sexual Masochism
  Either (1) or (2):
      (1) a preferred or exclusive mode of producing sexual excitement is
      to be humiliated, bound, beaten, or otherwise made to suffer
      (2) the individual has intentionally participated in an activity in which
      he or she was physically harmed or his or her life was threatened,
      In order to produce sexual excitement

302.84 Sexual Sadism
The essential feature is the infliction of physical or psychological suffering on
another person in order to achieve sexual excitement.
    The diagnosis of Sexual Sadism is warranted under any of three different
conditions:
    (1) On a nonconsenting partner, the individual has repeatedly and in-
        tentionally inflicted psychological or physical suffering in order to
        achieve sexual excitement.
    (2) With a consenting partner a repeatedly preferred or exclusive mode of
        achieving sexual excitement combines humiliation with simulated or
        mildly injurious bodily suffering.
    (3) On a consenting partner bodily injury that is extensive, permanent, or
        possibly mortal is inflicted in order to achieve sexual excitement.

    Age at onset. Sadistic sexual fantasies are likely to have been present in
childhood. The age at onset of sadistic activities is also variable, but is com-
monly by early adulthood.

    Course. The condition is usually chronic in its extreme form. When Sexual
Sadism is practiced with nonconsenting partners, the activity is likely to be
repeated until the individual is apprehended.
    Some individuals with the disorder may for many years engage in sadistic
acts without a need to increase the potential for inflicting serious physical dam-
age. Others, however, either because of an increased need or a diminished capac-
ity for restraint, increase the severity of the sadistic acts over time or during


                                          Psychosexual Disorders275

periods of stress. When the disorder is severe, these individuals may rape,
 torture, or kill their victims.

    Familial pattern. Although brutality commonly occurs in the families of
individuals with this disorder, there is no information on whether Sexual Sadism
 is more common in family members.

    Differential diagnosis. Rape or other sexual assault may be committed by
 individuals with this disorder. In such instances the suffering inflicted on the
 victim increases the sexual excitement of the assailant. However, it should not
 be assumed that all or even many rapists are motivated by Sexual Sadism. Often
 a rapist is not motivated by the prospect of inflicting suffering, and may even
 lose sexual desire as a consequence. These represent two ends of a spectrum, and
 for cases falling in the middle, it may be very difficult for the clinician to decide
if the diagnosis of Sexual Sadism is warranted.

  Diagnostic criteria for Sexual Sadism
  One of the following:

       (1) on a nonconsenting partner^ the individual has repeatedly in-
      tentionally inflicted psychological or physical suffering in order to
      produce sexual excitement
      (2) with a consenting partner^-the repeatedly preferred or exclusive
      mode of achieving sexual excitement combines humiliation with
      simulated or mildly injurious bodily suffering
      (3) on a consenting partner/ bodily injury that is extensive, per-
      manent, or possibly mortal is Inflicted In order to achieve sexual
      excitement

302.90 Atypical Paraphilia
This is a residual category for individuals with Paraphilias that cannot be
classified in any of the other categories. Such conditions include: Coprophilia
(feces); Frotteurism (rubbing); Klismaphilia (enema); Mysophilia (filth); Necro-
philia (corpse); Telephone Scatologia (lewdness); and Urophilia (urine).

PSYCHOSEXUAL DYSFUNCTIONS
The essential feature is inhibition in the appetitive or psychophysiological
changes that characterize the complete sexual response cycle. Ordinarily this
diagnostic category will be applied only when the disturbance is a major part of
the clinical picture, although it may not be part of the chief complaint. The
diagnosis is not made if the sexual dysfunction is attributed entirely to organic
factors, such as a physical disorder or a medication, or if it is due to another
Axis I mental disorder.
    The complete sexual response cycle can be divided into the following
phases:


276 Diagnostic Categories

    1. Appetitive. This consists of fantasies about sexual activity and a desire
to have sexual activity.
    2. Excitement. This consists of a subjective sense of sexual pleasure and ac-
companying physiological changes. The major change in the male consists of
penile tumescence leading to erection. In addition, there is the appearance of
Cowper's gland secretion. The major changes in the female consist of vaso-
congestion generalized in the pelvis with vaginal lubrication and swelling of the
external genitalia. In addition there are the development of the orgasmic plat-
form, which is the narrowing of the outer third of the vagina by increased pub-
ococcygeal muscle tension and vasocongestion; vasocongestion of the labia
minora; breast tumescence; and lengthening and widening of the inner two-
thirds of the vagina.
    3. Orgasm. This consists of a peaking of sexual pleasure, with release of
sexual tension and rhythmic contraction of the perineal muscles and pelvic
reproductive organs. In the male there is the sensation of ejaculatory inevita-
bility, which is followed by emission of semen, caused by contractions of the
prostate, seminal vesicles, and urethra. In the female there are contractions,
not always subjectively experienced as such, of the wall of the outer third of the
vagina. In both the male and the female there is often generalized muscular ten-
sion or contractions, such as involuntary pelvic thrusting.
    4. Resolution. This consists of a sense of general relaxation, well-being, and
muscular relaxation. During this phase men are physiologically refractory to
further erection and orgasm for a period of time. In contrast, women may be
able to respond to additional stimulation almost immediately.
    Inhibitions in the response cycle may occur at one or more of these phases,
although inhibition in the resolution phase is rarely of primary clinical sig-
nificance. Whenever more than one Psychosexual Dysfunction is present, they
should all be recorded, in the order of clinical significance.
    The particular manifestations of each of the Psychosexual Dysfunctions
are noted in the diagnostic criteria. In most instances there will be a disturbance
in both the subjective sense of pleasure or desire and objective performance.
More rarely there may be subjective disturbance alone, without any objective
signs of dysfunction, or, conversely, inhibition in performance without any
acknowledged subjective distress.
    In specifying diagnostic criteria, no attempt is made to require a minimum
proportion or type of sexual encounter in which the dysfunction must occur to
 warrant a diagnosis. This judgment has to be made by the clinician, who must
take into account various factors such as frequency, chronicity, subjective dis-
tress, and effect on other areas of functioning. The phrase "recurrent and
persistent" in the diagnostic criteria is a shorthand method of designating the
need for such a clinical judgment.
    All of the dysfunctions may be lifelong or acquired (developing after a
period of normal functioning), generalized or situational (limited to certain situa-
tions or with certain partners), and total or partial (degree or frequency of dis-


                                          Psychosexual Disorders 277

turbance). Although in most instances the dysfunctions occur during sexual
activity with a partner, in some cases it may be appropriate to identify dysfunc-
tions that occur during masturbation.

    Associated features. Frequently there are no other obvious signs of dis-
turbance. This is particularly the case in Inhibited Sexual Desire, since it does
not necessarily involve impairment in performance. In other cases there may be
a vague sense of not living up to some ill-defined concept of normality, or there
may be a variety of complaints, such as depression, anxiety, guilt, shame, frus-
tration, and somatic symptoms. Almost invariably a fear of failure and the de-
velopment of a "spectator" attitude (self-monitoring), with extreme sensitivity
to the reaction of the sexual partner, are present. This may further impair per-
formance and satisfaction and lead to secondary avoidance of sexual activity
and impaired communication with the sexual partner.

    Age at onset. The most common age at onset is early adult life, although
Premature Ejaculation more commonly begins with the first sexual encounters.
The most common age of clinical presentation is late 20s and early 30s, a few
years after establishment of a sustained sexual relationship. However, the first
appearance may be later in adult life, particularly with Inhibited Sexual Ex-
citement in the male.

    Course. The course is extremely variable. As previously noted, all of the
dysfunctions may be lifelong or acquired (developing after a period of normal
functioning). They may be limited to a single short-lived episode or a recurrent
pattern of episodic dysfunction. Inhibited Sexual Desire may develop as a reac-
tion to any of the other Psychosexual Dysfunctions.

    Impairment. Psychosexual Dysfunctions, even when severe, are not asso-
ciated with impairment in occupational functioning, but the relationship with a
sexual partner may suffer.

    Complications. The major complications consist of disrupted marital or
other sexual relationships.

    Predisposing factors. There appears to be a positive but slight correlation
between certain personality traits and psychopathology in general and the
presence of one or more Psychosexual Dysfunctions. Histrionic traits in women
frequently are associated with Inhibited Sexual Excitement and Inhibited Orgasm.
Compulsive traits in men frequently are associated with Inhibited Sexual De-
sire and Inhibited Sexual Excitement. Anxiety appears to predispose to the de-
velopment of Premature Ejaculation. Any negative attitude toward sexuality,
due to particular experiences, internal conflicts, or adherence to rigid subcul-
tural values, predisposes to the Psychosexual Dysfunctions.

    Prevalence. Although the exact prevalence is not known, most of these
disorders are believed to be common, particularly in their milder forms.


 278 Diagnostic Categories

    Sex ratio. The sex ratio varies for the particular dysfunction. Inhibited
 Sexual Desire and Inhibited Orgasm are more common in females. Premature
 Ejaculation, as defined, is restricted to men. Functional Vaginismus, by defini-
 tion, is restricted to women. Although Functional Dyspareunia is defined so that
 it can occur in males, it rarely does.
    Familial pattern. No information.
    Differential diagnosis. When a physical disorder partially accounts for the
 symptoms of a Psychosexual Dysfunction, provided that to some extent psycho-
 logical factors are also contributing to the disturbance, both diagnoses should
 be given (the physical disorder is recorded on Axis III). For example, Inhibited
 Sexual Excitement judged to be partly secondary to diabetes can be diagnosed
 if it is judged that it is partly secondary to performance anxiety as well. The
 measurement of nocturnal penile tumescence associated with REM sleep is a
 useful diagnostic technique for evaluating the degree to which a physical disorder
is etiologically related to the disturbance. When the disturbed sexual perfor-
mance is chronic, unvarying over time, and independent of situation, this also
 suggests that a physical disorder may be etiologically related to the disturbance.
 In many instances the underlying physical disorder may not have been previously
 diagnosed.
    If another Axis I mental disorder, for example, Major Depression, is the
 primary cause of a disturbance in sexual functioning, such as loss of sexual
 desire, a Psychosexual Dysfunction should not be diagnosed. However, in some
 instances it will not be clear whether the disturbance in sexual functioning ante-
 dates the other mental disorder (in which case it should also be diagnosed)
or whether it is secondary to the other mental disorder (in which case it should
not be diagnosed). Frequently a Personality Disorder may coexist with a Psycho-
 sexual Dysfunction and may even be conceptualized as etiologic. In such cases
the Psychosexual Dysfunction should be recorded on Axis I and the Personality
Disorder, on Axis II. If a V code condition such as Marital Problem or Other
Interpersonal Problem is the primary cause of a disturbance in functioning, the
Psychosexual Dysfunction should be diagnosed, and both conditions noted.
    If there is inadequate sexual stimulation, in either focus, intensity, or dura-
tion, the diagnosis of Psychosexual Dysfunction involving excitement or orgasm
is not made.
302.71 Inhibited Sexual Desire

  Diagnostic criteria
  A. Persistent and pervasive inhibition of sexual desire. The Judgment of
  inhibition is made by the clinician's taking into account factors that affect
  sexual desire such as age, sex, health, intensity and frequency of sexual
  desire, and the context of the individual's life. In actual practice this diag-
  nosis will rarely be made unless the lack of desire is a source of distress
  to either the individual or his or her partner. Frequently this category
  will be used in conjunction with one or more of the other Psycho-
  sexual Dysfunction categories.


                                          Psychosexual Disorders 279

   B. The disturbance is not caused exclusively by organic factors (e.g,,
   physical disorder or medication) and is not due to another Axis I dis-
   order.

 302.72 Inhibited Sexual Excitement
 This has also been termed frigidity or impotence.

   Diagnostic criteria
   A. Recurrent and persistent inhibition of sexual excitement during sexual
   activity, manifested by:
      in males, partial or complete failure to attain or maintain erection
       until completion of the sexual act, or
      In females, partial or complete failure to attain or maintain the lubri-
      cation-swelling response of sexual excitement until completion of the
      sexual act

  B. A clinical judgment that the individual engages in sexual activity trjat
  is adequate in focus, intensity, and duration.

  C The disturbance is not caused exclusively by organic factors-. (e$.>
  physical disorder or medication) and Is not due to another Axis I disorder,

302.73 Inhibited Female Orgasm

  Diagnostic criteria
  A. Recurrent and persistent inhibition of the female orgasm as mani-
  fested by a delay in or absence of orgasm following a normal sexual ex-
  citement phase during sexual activity that is judged by the clinician to be
  adequate in focus, intensity, and duration. The same individual may also
  meet the criteria for Inhibited Sexual Excitement if at other times there Is
  a problem with the excitement phase of sexual activity. In such cases both
  categories of Psychosexual Dysfunction should be noted.
      Some women are able to experience orgasm during noncoital clitoral
  stimulation, but are unable to experience it during coitus in the absence
  of manual clitoral stimulation. There is evidence to suggest that in some
  instances this represents a pathological inhibition that Justifies this diag-
  nosis whereas in other instances it represents a normal variation of the
  female sexual response. This difficult judgment is assisted by a thorough
  sexual evaluation, which may even require a trial of treatment

  B, The disturbance is not caused exclusively by organic factors (e.g.,
  physical disorder or medication) and is not due to another Axis I dis-
  order.


280 Diagnostic Categories

302.74 Inhibited Male Orgasm

  Diagnostic criteria
  A. Recurrent and persistent inhibition of the male orgasm as manifested
  by a delay in or absence of ejaculation following an adequate phase of
  sexual excitement The same individual may also meet the criteria for
  Inhibited Sexual Excitement if at other times there is a problem with the
  excitement phase of sexual activity. In such cases both categories of
  Psychosexual Dysfunction should be noted.

  B. The disturbance is not caused exclusively by organic factors (e.g.,
  physical disorder or medication) and is not due to another Axis I dis-
  order.

302.75 Premature Ejaculation

  Diagnostic criteria
  A. Ejaculation occurs before the individual wishes it, because of recur-
  rent and persistent absence of reasonable voluntary control of ejaculation
  and orgasm during sexual activity. The judgment of "reasonable control"
  is made by the clinician's taking into account factors that affect duration
  of the excitement phase, such as age, novelty of the sexual partner, and
  the frequency and duration of coitus.

  B. The disturbance is not due to another Axis I disorder.

302.76 Functional Dyspareunia

  Diagnostic criteria
  A. Coitus is associated with recurrent and persistent genital pain, in either
  the male or the female.

  B. The disturbance is not caused exclusively by a physical disorder,
  and is not due to lack of lubrication, Functional Vaginismus, or another
  Axis I disorder.

306.51 Functional Vaginismus

  Diagnostic criteria
  A. There is a history of recurrent and persistent involuntary spasm of the
  musculature of the outer third of the vagina that interferes with coitus.

  B. The disturbance is not caused exclusively by a physical disorder, and
  is not due to another Axis I disorder.


                                          Psychosexual Disorders281

302.70 Atypical Psychosexual Dysfunction
This category is for Psychosexual Dysfunctions that cannot be classified as a
specific Psychosexual Dysfunction. An example would be no erotic sensations
or even complete anesthesia despite normal physiological components of sexual
excitement and orgasm. Another example would be a female analogue of Pre-
mature Ejaculation.

OTHER PSYCHOSEXUAL DISORDERS

302.00 Ego-dystonic Homosexuality
The essential features are a desire to acquire or increase heterosexual arousal,
so that heterosexual relationships can be initiated or maintained, and a sustained
pattern of overt homosexual arousal that the individual explicitly states has been
unwanted and a persistent source of distress.
    This category is reserved for those homosexuals for whom changing sexual
orientations is a persistent concern, and should be avoided in cases where the
desire to change sexual orientations may be a brief, temporary manifestation
of an individual's difficulty in adjusting to a new awareness of his or her homo-
sexual impulses.
    Individuals with this disorder may have either no or very weak heterosexual
arousal. Typically there is a history of unsuccessful attempts at initiating or sus-
taining heterosexual relationships. In some cases no attempt has been made to
initiate a heterosexual relationship because of the expectation of lack of sexual
responsiveness. In other cases the individual has been able to have short-lived
heterosexual relationships, but complains that the heterosexual impulses are too
weak to sustain such relationships. When the disorder is present in an adult,
usually there is a strong desire to be able to have children and family life.
    Generally individuals with this disorder have had homosexual relationships,
but often the physical satisfaction is accompanied by emotional upset because of
strong negative feelings regarding homosexuality. In some cases the negative
feelings are so strong that the homosexual arousal has been confined to fantasy.

    Associated features. Loneliness is particularly common. In addition, guilt,
shame, anxiety, and depression may be present.

    Age at onset. The most common age at onset is during early adolescence
when the individual becomes aware that he or she is homosexually aroused and
has already internalized negative feelings about homosexuality.

    Course. There is some evidence that in time many individuals with this
disorder give up the yearning to become heterosexual and accept themselves
as homosexuals. This process is apparently facilitated by the presence of a sup-
portive homosexual subculture. It is not known how often the disorder, without
treatment, is self-limited. However, there is a general consensus that spontaneous
development of a satisfactory heterosexual adjustment in individuals who
previously had a sustained pattern of exclusively homosexual arousal is rare.


282 Diagnostic Categories

The extent to which therapy is able to decrease homosexual arousal, increase
heterosexual arousal, or help homosexuals become satisfied with their sexuality
is disputed.

    Impairment. There is generally no or only mild impairment in social func-
tioning.

    Complications. Dysthymic Disorder can be a complication.

    Predisposing factors. Since homosexuality itself is not considered a mental
disorder, the factors that predispose to homosexuality are not included in this
section. The factors that predispose to Ego-dystonic Homosexuality are those
negative societal attitudes toward homosexuality that have been internalized.
In addition, features associated with heterosexuality, such as having children
and socially sanctioned family life, may be viewed as desirable and incompatible
with a homosexual arousal pattern.

    Prevalence, sex ratio, and familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. Homosexuality that is ego-syntonic is not classified
as a mental disorder. In addition, the attitude that "I guess life would be easier
if I were heterosexual" does not warrant this diagnosis. This category is re-
served for homosexuals for whom changing sexual orientations is a persistent
concern. Similarly, distress resulting simply from a conflict between a homo-
sexual and society should not be classified here.
    Individuals with Inhibited Sexual Desire may sometimes attribute the lack
of sexual arousal to "latent homosexuality." However, Ego-dystonic Homo-
sexuality should be diagnosed only when homosexual arousal is overt, although
it may be limited to fantasy.
    Homosexuals who develop a Major Depression may then express self-
hatred because of their sexual orientation. The diagnosis of Ego-dystonic Homo-
sexuality should not be made if the ego-dystonic quality is judged to be only a
transient symptom of a Depressive Disorder.

  Diagnostic criteria for Ego-dystonic Homosexuality
  A. The individual complains that heterosexual arousal is persistently
  absent or weak and significantly interferes with initiating or maintaining
  wanted heterosexual relationships,

  8. There is a sustained pattern of homosexual arousal that the individual
  explicitly states has been unwanted and a persistent source of distress.

302.89 Psychosexual Disorder Not Elsewhere Classified
This is a residual category for disorders whose chief manifestations are psycho-
logical disturbances related to sexuality not covered by any of the other


                                          Psychosexual Disorders 283

specific categories in the diagnostic class of Psychosexual Disorders. In rare
instances this category may be used concurrently with one of the specific
diagnoses when both diagnoses are necessary to explain or describe the clinical
disturbance.
    Examples include the following:
    (1) marked feelings of inadequacy related to self-imposed standards of
masculinity or femininity, such as body habitus, size and shape of sex organs,
or sexual performance;
    (2) impaired pleasure during the normal physiological pelvic responses of
orgasm;
    (3) distress about a pattern of repeated sexual conquests with a succession
of individuals who exist only as things to be used (Don Juanism and nympho-
mania);
    (4) confusion about preferred sexual orientation.


This page intentionally left blank 


                            IL '•* x-iJri 4-1 imi i c? I •iiiOjnii'**jnl^%ii«of


"Factitious" means not real, genuine, or natural. Factitious Disorders are there-
fore characterized by physical or psychological symptoms that are produced by
the individual and are under voluntary control. The sense of voluntary control
is subjective, and can only be inferred by an outside observer.
    The judgment that the behavior is under voluntary control is based, in
part, on the patient's ability to simulate illness in such a way that he or she
is not discovered. This involves decisions as to timing and concealment that re-
quire a degree of judgment and intellectual activity suggestive of voluntary
control. However, these acts have a compulsive quality, in the sense that the
individual is unable to refrain from a particular behavior, even if its dangers
are known. They should therefore be considered "voluntary" in the sense that
they are deliberate and purposeful, but not in the sense that the acts can be
controlled. Thus, in Factitious Disorders, behavior under voluntary control is
used to pursue goals that are involuntarily adopted.
    The judgment that a particular behavior is under voluntary control is made
by the exclusion of all other possible causes of the behavior. For example, an in-
dividual presenting with hematuria is found to have anticoagulants in his pos-
session; he denies having taken them, but blood studies are consistent with the
ingestion of the anticoagulants. A reasonable inference is that the individual may
have voluntarily taken the medication. A single episode of such behavior could
be accidental rather than intentional. Repeated episodes would justify an
inference of voluntary production of the symptoms—a Factitious Disorder. The
presence of factitious psychological or physical symptoms does not preclude
the coexistence of true psychological or physical symptoms.
    Factitious Disorders are distinguished from acts of malingering. In Malin-
gering, the "patient" is also in voluntary control of the symptoms, but it is for
a goal that is obviously recognizable with a knowledge of the environmental
circumstances, rather than of his or her psychology. For example, a claim of
physical illness in order to avoid jury duty, standing trial, or conscription into
the military would be classified as Malingering. Similarly, for a patient in a
mental hospital to simulate an exacerbation of his or her illness in order to
avoid transfer to another, less desirable facility would be an act of malingering.
In contrast, in a Factitious Disorder there is no apparent goal other than to
assume the patient role. If the patient mentioned above were being transferred
to an obviously more desirable facility, his or her simulated exacerbation of
symptoms would be a Factitious Disorder. Whereas an act of malingering may,
under certain circumstances, be considered adaptive, by definition a diagnosis of
a Factitious Disorder always implies psychopathology, most often a severe
personality disturbance.

                                285


 286 Diagnostic Categories

    In the past, some of the disorders classified here would have been subsumed
within the category of Hysteria.
    Factitious Disorders may present with psychological or physical symptoms.
Chronic Factitious Disorder with Physical Symptoms/ often referred to as Mun-
chausen syndrome, is the best known and most frequently reported of the
Factitious Disorders. The other two categories included in this section are
Factitious Disorder with Psychological Symptoms and Atypical Factitious Dis-
order with Physical Symptoms.

300.16 Factitious Disorder with Psychological Symptoms
The essential feature is the voluntary production of severe psychological
 (often psychotic) symptoms, suggestive of mental disorder. The individual's goal
is apparently to assume the "patient" role and is not otherwise understandable
in light of the individual's environmental circumstances (as is the case in Malin-
gering). This has also been referred to as Ganser syndrome, pseudopsychosis, or
pseudodementia.
    This disorder is often recognized by the pan-symptomatic complex of
psychological symptoms that are presented and by the fact that the symptoms
are worse when the individual is aware of being observed. Such an individual
may claim memory loss (recent and remote), hallucinations (auditory and
visual), and dissociative and conversion symptoms, along with suicidal ideation.
The same individual may be extremely suggestible and admit to many additional
symptoms asked about by the examiner. Conversely, the individual may be
extremely negativistic and uncooperative to further questioning. The psycho-
logical symptoms presented are usually a representation of the person's con-
cept of mental disorder and may not conform to any of the recognized diagnostic
categories.

    Associated features. "Vorbeireden," the symptom of giving approximate
 answers or talking past the point, may be present. This is to be considered
 when the person gives answers to questions involving intellectual functions
 (such as calculations) that consistently are near misses of the correct response.
When asked to multiply eight times eight, such a person may answer "sixty-
 five." This phenomenon, however, is not specific for this disorder, and may be
found in individuals with Schizophrenia or in persons without mental disorders
 who are exhausted or are being humorous.
    Factitious Disorder with Psychological Symptoms is almost always super-
imposed on a severe Personality Disorder. The individual may secretly use
 substances for the purpose of producing symptoms that suggest nonorganic
mental disorder. Stimulants (amphetamines, cocaine, or caffeine) may be used
 to produce restlessness or insomnia; hallucinogens (LSD, mescaline, THC) to
induce altered levels of consciousness and perception; analgesics (heroin, mor-
phine) to induce euphoria; hypnotics (barbiturates, alcohol), to induce lethargy.
Combinations of the above substances can produce very bizarre presentations.

    Age at onset, prevalence, and familial pattern. No information.


                                             Factitious Disorders 287

     Sex ratio. The disorder is apparently more common in males.

     Predisposing factors. Severe Personality Disorder is a predisposing factor.

     Course. The course may be limited to one or more brief episodes, or may
 be chronic.

     Impairment. Impairment tends to be severe.

     Complications. Frequent hospitalizations are a complication.

     Differential diagnosis. Differential diagnosis of this disorder from other
 mental disorders is extremely difficult. The clinician may notice that the total
 clinical picture is not characteristic of any recognized mental disorder. Psycho-
 logical tests (e.g., projective tests, or the Bender-Gestalt) may be helpful when
 the responses elicited suggest a mixture of perceptual, cognitive, and intel-
 lectual impairment that is not characteristic of any mental disorder but suggests,
 rather, the individual's concept of mental disorder. There is the danger, however,
 that simulated bizarre responses will be taken at face value.
     A true Dementia frequently has a demonstrable organic etiology or patho-
 physiological process. In "pseudo"-dementia there are often near-miss, approxi-
 mate answers rather than gross inability to answer questions correctly, as is
 often the case in a Factitious Disorder.
     In a true psychosis, such as Brief Reactive Psychosis or Schizophreniform
 Disorder, the individual's behavior on the ward generally will not differ markedly
 from his or her behavior in the clinician's office. In contrast, in a Factitious Dis-
 order with psychotic features the individual may appear to respond to auditory
 hallucinations only when under the impression that he or she is being watched.
    For a discussion of the differential diagnosis with Malingering, see p. 331.

   Diagnostic criteria for Factitious Disorder with Psychological Symptoms
  A. The production of psychological symptoms is apparently under the
   individual's voluntary control.

   B. The symptoms produced are not explained by any other mental dis-
  order (although they may be superimposed on one),

  C. The individual's goal is apparently to assume the "patient" role and
  is not otherwise understandable in light o! the individual's environmental
  circumstances (as is the case in Malingering).

Factitious Disorder with Physical Symptoms
The essential feature is the presentation of physical symptoms that are not
real. The presentation may be total fabrication, as in complaints of acute ab-
dominal pain in the absence of any such pain; self-inflicted, as in the production
of abscesses by injection of saliva into the skin; an exaggeration or exacerbation


288 Diagnostic Categories

of a preexisting physical condition, as in the acceptance of a penicillin injection
despite a known previous history of an anaphylactic reaction; or any combina-
tion or variation of the above.

301.51 Chronic Factitious Disorder with Physical Symptoms
The essential feature is the individual's plausible presentation of factitious
physical symptoms to such a degree that he or she is able to obtain and sustain
multiple hospitalizations. The individual's entire life may consist of either try-
ing to get admitted into or staying in hospitals. Common clinical pictures in-
clude severe right lower quadrant pain associated with nausea and vomiting,
dizziness and blacking out, massive hemoptysis, generalized rash and abscesses,
fevers of undetermined origin, bleeding secondary to ingestion of anticoagulants,
and "lupuslike" syndromes. All organ systems are potential targets, and the
symptoms presented are limited only by the individual's medical knowledge,
sophistication, and imagination. This disorder has also been called Miinchausen
syndrome.
    These individuals usually present their history with great dramatic flair,
but are extremely vague and inconsistent when questioned in more detail. There
may be uncontrollable pathological lying, in a manner intriguing to the listener,
about any aspect of the individual's history or symptomatology (pseudologica
fantastica). These individuals often have extensive knowledge of medical
terminology and hospital routines. Once admitted to a hospital they can create
havoc on the ward by demanding attention from hospital staff and by non-
compliance with hospital routines and regulations. After an extensive work-up
of their initial chief complaints proves negative, they will often complain of
other physical problems and produce more factitious symptoms. Complaints of
pain and requests for analgesics are very common. Individuals with this dis-
order often eagerly undergo multiple invasive procedures and operations.
While in the hospital they usually have few visitors. When confronted with
evidence of their factitious symptoms they either deny the allegations or rapidly
discharge themselves against medical advice. They will frequently be admitted
to another hospital the same day. Their courses of hospitalizations often take
them to numerous cities, states, countries, and even different continents. Eventu-
ally a point is usually reached at which the individual is "caught" producing
factitious symptomatology; he or she is recognized by someone from a previous
admission or another hospital, or other hospitals are contacted and confirm
multiple prior hospitalizations for factitious symptomatology.

    Associated features. Substance abuse, particularly of analgesics and seda-
tives, often medically prescribed, may be present.

    Age at onset and course. Onset is usually in early adult life, often with a
hospitalization for true physical illness. Rapidly thereafter, a pattern of suc-
cessive hospitalizations begins and becomes a lifelong pattern.

    Impairment. This disorder is extremely incapacitating. The course of chronic
hospitalizations is obviously incompatible with the individual's maintaining


                                             Factitious Disorders 289

steady employment, maintaining family ties, and forming lasting interpersonal
relationships.

    Complications. These individuals frequently acquire a "gridiron abdomen"
from the multiple surgical procedures they have undergone. Multiple hospital-
izations frequently lead to iatrogenically-induced physical illness, such as scar
tissue formation from unnecessary surgery, abscesses from numerous injections,
and adverse drug reactions. Occasionally they will spend time in jail because of
vagrancy, or assault in mental hospitals because of transfers from general hospi-
tals when the factitious nature of their symptoms is discovered.

    Predisposing factors. These may include true physical disorder during child-
hood or adolescence leading to extensive medical treatment and hospitalization;
a grudge against the medical profession, sometimes due to previous medical
mismanagement; employment in the medical field as a nurse, technician, or other
paraprofessional; underlying dependent, exploitative, or masochistic personality
traits; an important relationship with a physician in the past, e.g., a family mem-
ber who was a physician, or seduction by a physician during childhood or adoles-
cence.

    Prevalence. Some believe the disorder is common but rarely recognized.
Others believe that it is rare and that the few individuals with the disorder are
being overreported because they appear to different physicians at different hospi-
tals, often using different names.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is apparently more common in males.

    Familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. The major diagnostic consideration is obviously true
physical disorder. A high index of suspicion for Chronic Factitious Disorder with
Physical Symptoms should be aroused if any combination of the following is
noted: pseudologica fantastica, with emphasis on the dramatic presentation; dis-
ruptive behavior on the ward, including noncompliance with hospital rules and
regulations and arguing excessively with the nurses and physicians; extensive
knowledge of medical terminology and hospital routines; continued use of
analgesics for "pain"; evidence of multiple surgical interventions, e.g., a "gridiron
abdomen" or burr holes in the skull; extensive history of traveling; few, if any,
visitors while hospitalized; and a fluctuating clinical course with the rapid pro-
duction of "complications" or new "pathology" once the initial work-up proves
to be negative.
    In Somatoform Disorders there are also physical complaints not due to true
physical disorder. However, the symptom production is not under voluntary
control, and admissions to hospitals are rarely as common as in Chronic Facti-
tious Disorder with Physical Symptoms.
    Individuals with Malingering may seek hospitalization by producing symp-
toms in attempts to obtain compensation, evade the police, or simply "get a


290 Diagnostic Categories

bed for the night." However, the goal is usually apparent, and they can "stop"
the symptom when it is no longer useful to them.
    Antisocial Personality Disorder is often incorrectly diagnosed on the basis
of the pseudologica fantastica, the lack of close relations with others, and the
occasionally associated drug and criminal histories. Antisocial Personality Dis-
order differs from this disorder by its earlier onset and its rare association with
chronic hospitalization as a way of life.
    Schizophrenia is often incorrectly diagnosed because of the bizarre life-style.
However, the characteristic psychotic symptoms of Schizophrenia are not
present.

  Diagnostic criteria for Chronic Factitious Disorder with Physical Symptoms
  A. Plausible presentation of physical symptoms that are apparently under
  the individual's voluntary control to such a degree that there are multiple
  hospital rzations.

  B, The individual's goal is apparently to assume the "patient" role and
  is not otherwise understandable in light of the individual's environmental
  circumstances (as is the case in Malingering),

300.19 Atypical Factitious Disorder with Physical Symptoms
This is a residual category for Factitious Disorders with Physical Symptoms
that do not fulfill the criteria for Chronic Factitious Disorder with Physical
Symptoms.
    Usually individuals with Atypical Factitious Disorder with Physical Symp-
toms do not require hospitalization. Examples include dermatitis artifacta (in-
duced by excoriation or chemicals) and voluntary dislocation of the shoulder.


        Disorders of Impulse Control
                 Not Elsewhere Classified


This is a residual diagnostic class for disorders of impulse control that are
 not classified in other categories, e.g., as a Substance Use Disorder or Paraphilia.
    The essential features of disorders of impulse control are:
     1. Failure to resist an impulse, drive, or temptation to perform some act
 that is harmful to the individual or others. There may or may not be conscious
 resistance to the impulse. The act may or may not be premeditated or planned.
    2. An increasing sense of tension before committing the act.
    3. An experience of either pleasure, gratification, or release at the time of
 committing the act. The act is ego-syntonic in that it is consonant with the im-
mediate conscious wish of the individual. Immediately following the act there
 may or may not be genuine regret, self-reproach, or guilt.
    This class contains five specific categories: Pathological Gambling, Klepto-
mania, Pyromania, Intermittent Explosive Disorder, and Isolated Explosive
 Disorder. Finally, there is a residual category, Atypical Impulse Control Dis-
order.

312.31 Pathological Gambling
The essential features are a chronic and progressive failure to resist im-
pulses to gamble and gambling behavior that compromises, disrupts, or damages
personal, family, or vocational pursuits. The gambling preoccupation, urge, and
activity increase during periods of stress. Problems that arise as a result of the
gambling lead to an intensification of the gambling behavior. Characteristic
problems include loss of work due to absences in order to gamble, defaulting on
debts and other financial responsibilities, disrupted family relationships, borrow-
ing money from illegal sources, forgery, fraud, embezzlement, and income
tax evasion.
    Commonly these individuals have the attitude that money causes and
is also the solution to all their problems. As the gambling increases, the indi-
vidual is usually forced to lie in order to obtain money and to continue gambling,
but hides the extent of the gambling. There is no serious attempt to budget or
save money. When borrowing resources are strained, antisocial behavior in order
to obtain money for more gambling is likely. Any criminal behavior—e.g.,
forgery, embezzlement, or fraud—is typically nonviolent. There is a conscious
intent to return or repay the money.

    Associated features. These individuals most often are overconfident, some-
what abrasive, very energetic, and "big spenders"; but there are times when they
show obvious signs of personal stress, anxiety, and depression.

                                291


292 Diagnostic Categories

    Age at onset and course. The disorder usually begins in adolescence and
waxes and wanes, tending to be chronic.

    Impairment. The disorder is extremely incapacitating and results in failure
to maintain financial solvency or provide basic support for oneself or one's family.
The individual may become alienated from family and acquaintances and may
lose what he or she has accomplished or attained in life.

    Complications. Suicide attempts, association with fringe and illegal groups,
and arrest for nonviolent crimes that may lead to imprisonment are among the
possible complications.

    Predisposing factors. These may include: loss of parent by death, separa-
tion, divorce, or desertion before the child is 15 years of age; inappropriate
parental discipline (absence, inconsistency, or harshness); exposure to gambling
activities as an adolescent; a high family value on material and financial symbols;
and lack of family emphasis on saving, planning, and budgeting.

    Prevalence. No information.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is apparently more common among males than
females.

    Familial pattern. Pathological Gambling and Alcoholism are more common
in the fathers of males and in the mothers of females with the disorder than in
the general population.

    Differential diagnosis. In social gambling, gambling with friends is engaged
in mainly on special occasions and with predetermined acceptable losses.
    During a manic or hypomanic episode loss of judgment and excessive
gambling may follow the onset of the mood disturbance. When manic-like mood
changes occur in Pathological Gambling they typically follow winning.
    Problems with gambling are often associated with Antisocial Personality
Disorder and in Pathological Gambling antisocial behavior is frequent. However,
in Pathological Gambling any antisocial behavior that occurs is out of despera-
tion to obtain money to gamble when money is no longer available and legal
resources have been exhausted. Criminal behavior is rare when the individual has
money. Also, unlike the individual with Antisocial Personality Disorder, the
individual with Pathological Gambling usually has a good work history until it
is disrupted because of the gambling.

  Diagnostic criteria for Pathological Gambling
  A, The individual is chronically and progressively unable to resist im-
  pulses to gamble.


                Disorders of Impulse Control Not Elsewhere Classified 293

   B. Gambling compromises, disrupts, or damages family, personal, and
   vocational pursuits, as indicated by at least three of the following:

       (1} arrest for forgery, fraud, embezzlement, or income tax evasion
       due to attempts to obtain money for gambling
       (2) default on debts or other financial responsibilities
       (3) disrupted family or spouse relationship due to gambling
       (4) borrowing of money from illegal sources (loan sharks)
       {5} inability to account for loss of money or to produce evidence of
       winning money, if this is claimed*
       (6) loss of work due to absenteeism in order to pursue gambling
       activity
       {7} necessity for another person to provide money to relieve a des-
       perate financial situation

   C. The gambling is not due to Antisocial Personality Disorder.

 312.32 Kleptomania
 The essential feature is a recurrent failure to resist impulses to steal ob-
 jects that are not for immediate use or their monetary value: the objects taken
 are either given away, returned surreptitiously, or kept and hidden. Almost in-
 variably the individual has enough money to pay for the stolen objects. The
 individual experiences an increasing sense of tension before committing the act
 and intense gratification while committing it. Although the theft does not occur
 when immediate arrest is probable (e.g., in full view of a policeman), it is not
preplanned, and the chances of apprehension are not fully taken into account.
The stealing is done without long-term planning and without assistance from,
 or collaboration with, others.
    The diagnosis is not made if the stealing is due to Conduct Disorder or Anti-
 social Personality Disorder.

    Associated features. The individual often displays signs of depression,
anxiety, and guilt over the possibility or actuality of being apprehended and the
resultant loss of status in society. Often, but not invariably, there are signs of
personality disturbance.

    Age at onset and course. The age at onset may be as early as childhood.
The condition waxes and wanes and tends to be chronic; how often it "burns
itself out" is unknown.

    Impairment and complications. Impairment is usually due to the legal con-
sequences of being apprehended, the major complication of the disorder.

    Predisposing factors, prevalence, and familial pattern. No information.

    Sex ratio. Although the majority of individuals apprehended for shop-


294 Diagnostic Categories

lifting are female, only a very small proportion of these individuals have Klepto-
mania. No data are available on the true sex ratio for the disorder.

    Differential diagnosis. In ordinary stealing there is no evidence of a failure
to resist the impulse; the act is usually planned, and the objects are stolen for
their immediate use or monetary gain.
    In Malingering, there may be an attempt to simulate the disorder in order
to avoid criminal prosecution for common thievery. In Conduct Disorder, Anti-
social Personality Disorder, and manic episodes stealing may occur; however,
in such cases the act is obviously due to the more pervasive disorder.
    In Schizophrenia stealing may be in response to delusions or hallucinations.
In Organic Mental Disorders it may occur because of a failure to appreciate the
consequences of the act, or because of failure to remember to pay for the object
that has been taken.

  Diagnostic criteria for Kleptomania
  A, Recurrent failure to resist impulses to steal objects that are not for
  immediate use or their monetary value.

  8. Increasing sense of tension before committing the act.

  C. An experience of either pleasure or release at the time of committing
  the theft.

  D. Stealing is done without long-term planning and assistance from, or
  collaboration with, others.

  E. Not due to Conduct Disorder or Antisocial Personality Disorder.

312.33 Pyromania
The essential features are recurrent failure to resist impulses to set fires
and intense fascination with setting fires and seeing them burn. Before setting the
fire, the individual experiences a buildup of tension; and once the fire is under-
way, he or she experiences intense pleasure or release. Although the fire-setting
results from a failure to resist an impulse, there may be considerable advance
preparation for starting the fire, and the individual may leave obvious clues.
    The diagnosis is not made when fire-setting is due to Conduct Disorder,
Antisocial Personality Disorder, Schizophrenia, or an Organic Mental Disorder.
    Individuals with the disorder are often recognized as regular "watchers" at
fires in their neighborhoods, frequently set off false alarms, and show interest
in fire-fighting paraphernalia. They may be indifferent to the consequences of
the fire for life or property, or they may get satisfaction from the resulting
destruction.

    Associated features. Alcohol Intoxication, Psychosexual Dysfunctions,
lower than average IQ, chronic personal frustrations, and resentment of authority


                Disorders of Impulse Control Not Elsewhere Classified 295

 figures are among the associated features. Cases have been described in which
 the individual was sexually aroused by fires.

     Age at onset. Onset is usually in childhood. When it is in adolescence or
 adulthood, the fire-setting tends to be more deliberately destructive.

     Course. No information.

     Impairment and complications. Impairment is usually due to the legal con-
 sequences of being apprehended, the major complication of the disorder.

     Sex ratio. The disorder is diagnosed far more commonly in males than in
 females.

     Predisposing factors, prevalence, and familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. Young children's experimentation and fascination
 with matches, lighters, and fire may be a part of their normal investigation of
 their environment.
    In Conduct Disorder, Antisocial Personality Disorder, and the incendiary
 acts of sabotage carried out by political extremists or by "paid torches," fire-
 setting occurs as a deliberate act rather than as a failure to resist an impulse.
 In Schizophrenia, fire-setting may be in response to delusions or hallucinations.
 In Organic Mental Disorders, fire-setting may occur because of failure to appre-
 ciate the consequences of the act.

  Diagnostic criteria for Pyromania
  A. Recurrent failure to resist impulses to set fires*

  8. Increasing sense of tension before setting the fire.

  C An experience of either intense pleasure, gratification, or release at the
  time of committing the act.

  D. Lack of motivation, such as monetary gain or sociopolitical ideology,
  for setting fires.

  E Not due to an Organic Mental Disorder, Schizophrenia, Antisocial Per-
  sonality Disorder, or Conduct Disorder,

312.34 Intermittent Explosive Disorder
The essential features are several discrete episodes of loss of control of
aggressive impulses that result in serious assault or destruction of property. For
example, with no or little provocation the individual may suddenly start to hit
strangers and throw furniture. The degree of aggressivity expressed during an


296 Diagnostic Categories

episode is grossly out of proportion to any precipitating psychosocial stressor.
The individual may describe the episodes as "spells" or "attacks." The symp-
toms appear within minutes or hours and, regardless of duration, remit almost
as quickly. Genuine regret or self-reproach at the consequences of the action and
the inability to control the aggressive impulse may follow each episode. There
are no signs of generalized impulsivity or aggressiveness between the episodes.
    The diagnosis is not made if the loss of control is due to Schizophrenia,
Antisocial Personality Disorder, or Conduct Disorder. Mild forms of this dis-
order have, in the past, been called Explosive Personality.
    Prodromal affective or autonomic symptoms may signal an impending
episode. During the episode there may be subtle changes in sensorium; and
following the episode there may be partial or spotty amnesia. The behavior is
usually a surprise to those in the individual's milieu, and even the afflicted
individual is often startled by his or her own behavior, sometimes describing the
events as resulting from a compelling force beyond his or her control, even
though he or she is willing to accept responsibility for his or her actions.

    Associated features. It is not clear to what extent other associated psycho-
pathology is usually present between episodes.
    Often individuals claim hypersensitivity to sensory input such as loud
noises, rhythmic auditory or visual stimuli, and bright lights. Other features
suggesting an organic disturbance may be present, such as nonspecific EEG
abnormalities or minor neurological signs and symptoms thought to reflect sub-
cortical or limbic system dysfunction. Epilepsy is rarely present, but is never-
theless more common than in individuals without the disorder. Medical history
often reveals hyperactive motor behavior and proneness to accident.

    Age at onset. The disorder may begin at any stage of life, but more com-
monly begins in the second or third decade.

    Course. No information.

    Impairment. Normal social relations may be impaired because of social
ostracism that results from the unpredictable aggressive behavior.

    Complications. Incarceration or chronic hospitalization may result.

    Predisposing factors. Any toxic agent, such as alcohol, that may lower the
threshold for violent outbursts, and conditions conducive to brain dysfunction,
such as perinatal trauma, infantile seizures, head trauma, and encephalitis may
predispose to this disorder.

    Prevalence. The disorder is apparently very rare.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is apparently more common in males than in females.
The males are likely to be seen in a correctional institution and the females, in
a mental health facility.


                Disorders of Impulse Control Not Elsewhere Classified 297

     Familial pattern. The disorder is apparently more common in family mem-
 bers than in the general population.

     Differential diagnosis. An underlying physical disorder, such as a brain
 tumor or epilepsy, may in rare cases cause this syndrome. In such instances the
 diagnosis Intermittent Explosive Disorder should be recorded on Axis I, and the
 physical disorder, on Axis III.
     In Antisocial Personality Disorder, outbursts of aggressiveness are common,
 but aggressiveness and impulsivity are also present between the outbursts. In
 Dissociative Disorder any loss of control that occurs invariably follows a major
 stressful event, whereas in this disorder there is usually only a minor or no
 precipitating event. In any case, if the disturbance meets the criteria for Inter-
 mittent Explosive Disorder, this precludes a diagnosis of a Dissociative Disorder.
     In Paranoid Disorder or Schizophrenia, Catatonic Type, there may be out-
 bursts of violent behavior in response to delusions or hallucinations.

   Diagnostic criteria for Intermittent Explosive Disorder
  A. Several discrete episodes of loss of control of aggressive impulses
   resulting in serious assault or destruction of property.

   B. Behavior that is grossly out of proportion to any precipitating psycho-
  social stressor.

  C. Absence of Signs of generalized impulsivity or aggressiveness between
  episodes,

  D. Not due to Schizophrenia, Antisocial Personality Disorder, or Con-
  duct Disorder,

312.35 Isolated Explosive Disorder
The essential feature is a single, discrete episode of failure to resist an im-
pulse that led to a single, violent, externally directed act, which had a catastrophic
impact on others and for which the available information does not justify the
diagnosis of Schizophrenia, Antisocial Personality Disorder, or Conduct Dis-
order. An example would be an individual who for no apparent reason sud-
denly began shooting at total strangers in a fit of rage and then shot himself.
In the past this disorder was referred to as "catathymic crisis."
    In some cases additional information indicates an underlying psychosis, such
as Schizophrenia, Paranoid Type, which would then preempt this diagnosis. As
with Intermittent Explosive Disorder, this category is defined behaviorally. In
those rare instances in which an underlying organic etiology is revealed, such
as a brain tumor, this would be an additional diagnosis, coded on Axis III.
    Other features of this disorder are similar to those of Intermittent Explosive
Disorder.


 298 Diagnostic Categories

  Diagnostic criteria lor Isolated Explosive Disorder
  A. A single, discrete episode in which failure to resist an impulse led
  to a single, violent, externally directed act that had a catastrophic impact
  on others.

  B. The degree of aggressivity expressed during the episode was grossly
  out of proportion to any precipitating psychosocial stressor.

  C. Before the episode there were no signs of generalized impulsrvity or
  aggressiveness.

  D. Not due to Schizophrenia, Antisocial Personality Disorder; or Conduct
  Disorder.

312.39 Atypical Impulse Control Disorder
This category is for Disorders of Impulse Control that cannot be classified
elsewhere.


                          Adjustment Disorder


The essential feature is a maladaptive reaction to an identifiable psycho-
social stressor, that occurs within three months after the onset of the stressor.
The maladaptive nature of the reaction is indicated by either impairment in so-
cial or occupational functioning or symptoms that are in excess of a normal
and expected reaction to the stressor. The disturbance is not merely one in-
stance of a pattern of overreaction to a stressor or an exacerbation of one of
the mental disorders previously described. It is assumed that the disturbance will
eventually remit after the stressor ceases or, if the stressor persists, when a new
level of adaptation is achieved. This category should not be used if the dis-
turbance meets the criteria for a specific disorder, such as an Anxiety or Affective
Disorder.
    The stressors may be single, such as divorce, or multiple, such as marked
business difficulties and marital problems. They may be recurrent, as with sea-
sonal business crises, or continuous, as with chronic illness or residence in a de-
teriorating neighborhood. They can occur in a family setting, e.g., in discordant
intrafamilial relationships. They may affect only the individual, e.g., the psycho-
logical reaction to a physical illness, or they may affect a group or community,
e.g., a natural disaster, or persecution based on racial, social, religious, or other
group affiliation. Some stressors are associated with specific developmental
stages, such as going to school, leaving the parental home, getting married, be-
coming a parent, failing to attain occupational goals, and retirement.
    The severity of the stressor and the specific stressor may be noted on Axis
IV (p. 26). The severity of a specific stressor is affected by its duration, timing,
and context in a person's life. For example, the stress of losing a parent is differ-
ent for a child and an adult.
    The severity of the reaction is not completely predictable from the severity
of the stressor. Individuals who are particularly vulnerable may have a more
severe form of the disorder following only a mild or moderate stressor, whereas
others may have only a mild form of the disorder in response to a marked and
continuing stressor.
    Types. The manifestations of the disorder are varied. Each specific type
represents a predominant clinical picture (p. 301), many of which are partial syn-
dromes of specific disorders. For example, Adjustment Disorder with Depressed
Mood is manifested by an incomplete depressive syndrome in response to a
psychosocial stressor.

    Age at onset. Adjustment Disorder may begin at any age.

    Course. By definition the disturbance begins within three months of the

                                299


300 Diagnostic Categories

onset of the stressor. If the stressor is a discrete event, such as being fired from
a job, the onset of the disturbance is usually within a few days, and the dura-
tion is relatively brief—no more than a few months. If the stressor continues, as
with a chronic physical illness, the duration may be much longer until a new
level of adaptation is achieved.

    Predisposing factors. A preexisting Personality Disorder or Organic Mental
Disorder may increase an individual's vulnerability to stress and predispose to
the development of Adjustment Disorder.

    Prevalence. The disorder is apparently common.

    Sex ratio and familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. In Conditions Not Attributable to a Mental Dis-
order (V codes), such as Other Interpersonal Problem or Phase of Life Problem
or Other Life Circumstance Problem, there is neither impairment in social or
occupational functioning nor symptoms that are in excess of a normal and
expectable reaction to the stressor. No absolute guidelines are available to aid in
this fundamental distinction, so clinical judgment will often be required.
    Personality Disorders are often repeatedly exacerbated by stress, in which
case the additional diagnosis of Adjustment Disorder is not made. However, if
new features are seen in response to a stressor—such as depressed mood in an
individual with Paranoid Personality Disorder who has never been bothered by
depression—then the additional diagnosis of Adjustment Disorder may be ap-
propriate.
    In Psychological Factors Affecting Physical Condition the individual may be
reacting to a psychosocial stressor, but the predominant symptomatology is a
physical condition or disorder.

  Diagnostic criteria for Adjustment Disorder
  A. A maladaptive reaction to an identifiable psychosocial stressor, that
  occurs within three months of the onset of the stressor.

  B. The maladaptive nature of the reaction is indicated by either of the
  following:

      (1) impairment in social or occupational functioning
      (2) symptoms that are in excess of a normal and expectable reaction
      to the stressor

  C. The disturbance is not merely one instance of a pattern of overreac-
  tion to stress or an exacerbation of one of the mental disorders previously
  described.


                                            Adjustment Disorder 301

  D. It is assumed that the disturbance will eventually remit after the
  stressor ceases or, if the stressor persists, when a new level of adaptation
  is achieved.

  E. The disturbance does not meet the criteria for any of the specific
  disorders listed previously or for Uncomplicated Bereavement

TYPES OF ADJUSTMENT DISORDER. Code predominant symptoms.

309.00 Adjustment Disorder with Depressed Mood
This category should be used when the predominant manifestation involves
such symptoms as depressed mood, tearfulness, and hopelessness. The major
differential is with Major Depression and Uncomplicated Bereavement.

309.24 Adjustment Disorder with Anxious Mood
This category should be used when the predominant manifestation involves
such symptoms as nervousness, worry, and jitteriness. The major differential
is with Anxiety Disorders.

309.28 Adjustment Disorder with Mixed Emotional Features
This category should be used when the predominant manifestation involves
various combinations of depression and anxiety or other emotions. The major
differential is with Depressive and Anxiety Disorders. An example would be an
adolescent, after moving away from home and parental supervision, who reacts
with ambivalence, depression, anger, and signs of increased dependency.

309.30 Adjustment Disorder with Disturbance of Conduct
This category should be used when the predominant manifestation involves
conduct in which there is violation of the rights of others or of major age-
appropriate societal norms and rules. Examples: truancy, vandalism, reckless
driving, fighting, defaulting on legal responsibilities. The major differential is
with Conduct Disorder and Antisocial Personality Disorder.

309.40 Adjustment Disorder with Mixed Disturbance of Emotions and Conduct
This category should be used when the predominant manifestation involves
both emotional features (e.g., depression, anxiety) and a disturbance of conduct
(see above).

309.23 Adjustment Disorder with Work (or Academic) Inhibition
This category should be used when the predominant manifestation is an in-
hibition in work or academic functioning occurring in an individual whose
previous work or academic performance has been adequate. Frequently there
are also varying mixtures of anxiety and depression. Examples include inability to
study and to write papers or reports. The major differential is with Depressive
Disorders and Anxiety Disorders.


302 Diagnostic Categories

309.83 Adjustment Disorder with Withdrawal
This category should be used when the predominant manifestation involves
social withdrawal without significant depressed or anxious mood. The major
differential is with Depressive Disorders.

309.90 Adjustment Disorder with Atypical Features
This category should be used when the predominant manifestation involves
symptoms that cannot be coded in any of the specific categories.


       Psychological Factors Affecting
                              Physical Condition


316.00 Psychological Factors Affecting Physical Condition
This category enables a clinician to note that psychological factors contribute
to the initiation or exacerbation of a physical condition. The physical condition
will usually be a physical disorder, but in some instances may be only a single
symptom, such as vomiting. The physical condition should be recorded on Axis
III.
    This manual accepts the tradition of referring to certain factors as "psycho-
logical/' although it is by no means easy to define what this phrase means. A
limited but useful definition in this context is the meaning ascribed to environ-
mental stimuli by the individual. Common examples of such stimuli are the
sights and sounds arising in interpersonal transactions, such as arguments, and
information that a loved one has died. The individual may not be aware of the
meaning that he or she has given to such environmental stimuli or of the
relationship between these stimuli and the initiation or exacerbation of the
physical condition.
    The judgment that psychological factors are affecting the physical condition
requires evidence of a temporal relationship between the environmental stimuli
and the meaning ascribed to them and the initiation or exacerbation of the
physical condition. Obviously, this judgment is more certain when there are
repeated instances of a temporal relationship.
    This category can be used for any physical condition to which psychological
factors are judged to be contributory. It can be used to describe disorders that
in the past have been referred to as either "psychosomatic" or "psychophysio-
logical."
    Common examples of physical conditions for which this category may be
appropriate include, but are not limited to: obesity, tension headache, migraine
headache, angina pectoris, painful menstruation, sacroiliac pain, neurodermatitis,
acne, rheumatoid arthritis, asthma, tachycardia, arrhythmia, gastric ulcer, du-
odenal ulcer, cardiospasm, pylorospasm, nausea and vomiting, regional enteritis,
ulcerative colitis, and frequency of micturition.
    This category should not be used for Conversion Disorders, which are
regarded as disturbances in which the specific pathophysiological process in-
volved in the disorder is not demonstrable by existing standard laboratory
procedures and which are conceptualized with psychological constructs only.

  Diagnostic criteria tor Psychological Factors Affecting Physical Condition
  A/ Psychologically meaningful, environmental stimuli are temporally

                                303


304 Diagnostic Categories

  related to-the-initiation or exacerbation of a physical condition {recorded
  on Axis HI).

  B. The physical condition has either demonstrable organic pathology
  (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis) or a known pathophysJobgical process (e.g.,
  migraine headache,, vomiting).

  C The condition is not due to a Somatoform Disorder.


                          Personality Disorders


(NOTE: These are coded on Axis II.)

Personality traits are enduring patterns of perceiving, relating to, and think-
ing about the environment and oneself, and are exhibited in a wide range of
important social and personal contexts. It is only when personality traits are
inflexible and maladaptive and cause either significant impairment in social or
occupational functioning or subjective distress that they constitute Personality
Disorders. The manifestations of Personality Disorders are generally recogniz-
able by adolescence or earlier and continue throughout most of adult life, though
they often become less obvious in middle or old age.
    Many of the features characteristic of the various Personality Disorders,
such as Dependent, Paranoid, Schizotypal, or Borderline Personality Disorder,
may be seen during an episode of another mental disorder, such as Major
Depression. The diagnosis of a Personality Disorder should be made only when
the characteristic features are typical of the individual's long-term functioning
and are not limited to discrete episodes of illness.

DIAGNOSIS OF PERSONALITY DISORDERS IN CHILDREN AND
ADOLESCENTS
Certain Personality Disorders have a relationship to corresponding diagnostic
categories in the section Disorders Usually First Evident in Infancy, Childhood,
or Adolescence. The corresponding disorders are as follows:

Disorders of Childhood or Adolescence Personality Disorders
Schizoid Disorder of Childhood or     Schizoid Personality Disorder
  Adolescence
Avoidant Disorder of Childhood or     Avoidant Personality Disorder
  Adolescence
Conduct Disorder                      Antisocial Personality Disorder
Oppositional Disorder                 Passive-Aggressive Personality
                                        Disorder
Identity Disorder                     Borderline Personality Disorder
    If the features of Schizoid or Avoidant Disorder of Childhood or Adoles-
cence continue into adult life, i.e., after age 18, the diagnosis should be changed
to the corresponding Personality Disorder. Some children or adolescents with
Conduct Disorder, particularly the Undersocialized Aggressive type, may meet
the criteria for Antisocial Personality Disorder in adulthood, in which case the
diagnosis should be changed. Similarly, some children with Oppositional Dis-

                                305


306 Diagnostic Categories

order as adults may have a disorder meeting the criteria for Passive-Aggressive
Personality Disorder, and some cases of Identity Disorder may later meet the
criteria for Borderline Personality Disorder.
    The other Personality Disorder categories may be applied to children or
adolescents in those unusual instances in which the particular maladaptive
personality traits appear to be stable. When this is done, there is obviously less
certainty that the Personality Disorder will persist unchanged over time.

    Associated features. Frequently the individual with a Personality Disorder
is dissatisfied with the impact his or her behavior is having on others or with
his or her inability to function effectively. This may be the case even when the
traits that lead to these difficulties are ego-syntonic, that is, are not regarded by
the individual as undesirable. In other cases, the traits may be ego-dystonic, but
the individual may be unable to modify them despite great effort.
    Disturbances of mood, frequently involving depression or anxiety, are
common, and may even be the individual's chief complaint.

    Age at onset and course. As noted above, Personality Disorders by defini-
tion begin in childhood or adolescence and are characteristic of most of adult
life.

    Impairment. Marked impairment in social and occupational functioning
may exist. When occupational functioning is impaired, the impairment is usually
sustained, but may be episodic and take the form of recurrent periods of work
inhibition (e.g., "writer's block"). With the exception of Antisocial, Schizotypal,
and Borderline Personality Disorders, individuals with Personality Disorders
rarely require hospitalization unless there is a superimposed disorder, such as
a Substance Use Disorder or Major Depression.

PERSONALITY DISORDERS AND PSYCHOTIC DISORDERS
When an individual with a psychotic disorder coded on Axis I, for example,
Schizophrenia or Paranoia, has had a preexisting Personality Disorder, the Per-
sonality Disorder should also be recorded on Axis II, followed by "Premorbid"
in parentheses. For example:

    Axis I: 295.32 Schizophrenia, Paranoid, Chronic

    Axis II: 301.20 Schizoid Personality Disorder (Premorbid)

SPECIFIC PERSONALITY DISORDERS
Traditionally, in diagnosing Personality Disorders the clinician has been directed
to find a single, specific Personality Disorder that adequately describes the indi-
vidual's disturbed personality functioning. Frequently this can be done only with
difficulty, since many individuals exhibit features that are not limited to a single
Personality Disorder. In this manual diagnoses of more than one Personality Dis-
order should be made if the individual meets the criteria for more than one.


                                           Personality Disorders 307

    The Personality Disorders have been grouped into three clusters. The first
cluster includes Paranoid, Schizoid, and Schizotypal Personality Disorders. Indi-
viduals with these disorders often appear "odd" or eccentric. The second cluster
includes Histrionic, Narcissistic, Antisocial, and Borderline Personality Dis-
orders. Individuals with these disorders often appear dramatic, emotional, or
erratic. The third cluster includes Avoidant, Dependent, Compulsive, and Pas-
sive-Aggressive Personality Disorders. Individuals with these disorders often
appear anxious or fearful. Finally, there is a residual category, Atypical, Mixed,
or Other Personality Disorder, that can be used for other specific Personality
Disorders or for conditions that do not qualify as any of the specific Personality
Disorders described in this manual.
    There is great variability in the detail with which the various Personality
Disorders are described and the specificity of the diagnostic criteria. Disorders
studied more extensively and rigorously than others, such as Antisocial Person-
ality Disorder, are described in greater detail.

301.00 Paranoid Personality Disorder
The essential feature is a Personality Disorder (p. 305) in which there is a
pervasive and unwarranted suspiciousness and mistrust of people, hypersensi-
tivity, and restricted affectivity not due to another mental disorder, such as
Schizophrenia, or a Paranoid Disorder.
    An attitude of suspicion is not only justified but is adaptive in many
difficult life situations. A person without signs of mental disorder is willing in
such a situation to abandon suspicions when presented with convincing contra-
dictory evidence, but one with Paranoid Personality Disorder ignores such
evidence, and may even become suspicious of someone who challenges his or
her suspicious ideas. Individuals with this disorder are typically hypervigilant
and take precautions against any perceived threat. They tend to avoid blame
even when it is warranted. They are often viewed by others as guarded, secre-
tive, devious, and scheming. They may question the loyalty of others, always
expecting trickery. For this reason, there may be pathological jealousy.
    When individuals with this disorder find themselves in a new situation,
they intensely and narrowly search for confirmation of their expectations, with
no appreciation of the total context. Their final conclusion is usually precisely
what they expected in the first place. They are concerned with hidden motives
and special meanings. Often, transient ideas of reference occur, e.g., that others
are taking special notice of them, or saying vulgar things about them.
    Individuals with this disorder are usually argumentative and exaggerate
difficulties by "making mountains out of molehills/7 They often find it difficult
to relax, usually appear tense, and show a tendency to counterattack when they
perceive any threat. Though they are critical of others, and often litigious, they
have great difficulty accepting criticism themselves.
    These individuals' affectivity is restricted, and they may appear "cold" to
others. They have no true sense of humor and are usually serious. They may
pride themselves on always being objective, rational, and unemotional. They
usually lack passive, soft, sentimental, and tender feelings.


 308 Diagnostic Categories

    Associated features. Individuals with this disorder are occasionally seen by
others as keen observers who are energetic, ambitious, and capable; but more
often they are viewed as hostile, stubborn, and defensive. They tend to be rigid
and unwilling to compromise. They often generate uneasiness and fear in others.
Often there is an inordinate fear of losing independence or the power to shape
events in accordance with their own wishes.
    They usually avoid intimacy except with those in whom they have absolute
 trust. They show an excessive need to be self-sufficient, to the point of ego-
 centricity and exaggerated self-importance. They avoid participation in group
 activities unless they are in a dominant position.
    They are often interested in mechanical devices, electronics, and automa-
 tion. They are keenly aware of power and rank and of who is superior or
 inferior, and are often envious and jealous of those in positions of power. They
 disdain people seen as weak, soft, sickly, or defective. They are generally un-
 interested in art or aesthetics.
     During periods of extreme stress, transient psychotic symptoms may occur,
 but of insufficient severity or duration to warrant an additional diagnosis.

     Impairment. Because individuals with this disorder usually realize that it is
 prudent to keep their unusual ideas to themselves, impairment is generally
 minimal. However, occupational difficulties are common, especially in relating
 to authority figures or co-workers. In more severe cases, all relationships are
 grossly impaired.

     Complications. The relationship of this disorder to the Paranoid Disorders
 (p. 196) and Schizophrenia, Paranoid Type (p. 188), is unclear. However, certain
 of the essential features of Paranoid Personality Disorder, such as suspiciousness
 and hypersensitivity, may predispose to the development of these other dis-
 orders.

     Predisposing factors. No information.

     Prevalence. This disorder rarely comes to clinical attention, since such
 persons rarely seek help for their personality problems or require hospitaliza-
 tion. Owing to a tendency of some of them to be moralistic, grandiose, and
 extrapunitive, it seems likely that individuals with this disorder are overrepre-
 sented among leaders of mystical or esoteric religions and of pseudoscientific
 and quasi-political groups.

     Sex ratio. This disorder is more commonly diagnosed in men.

     Familial pattern. No information.

     Differential diagnosis. In Paranoid Disorders and Schizophrenia, Paranoid
 Type, there are persistent psychotic symptoms, such as delusions and hallucina-
 tions, that are never part of Paranoid Personality Disorder. However, these
 disorders may be superimposed on Paranoid Personality Disorder. Antisocial
 Personality Disorder shares several features with Paranoid Personality Disorder,


                                            Personality Disorders 309

 e.g., difficulty in forming and sustaining close relationships, and poor occupa-
 tional performance; but except when the two disorders coexist, a lifelong his-
 tory of antisocial behavior is not present in Paranoid Personality Disorder.

   Diagnostic criteria for Paranoid Personality Disorder
   The following are characteristic of the individual's current and long-term
   functioning, are not limited to episodes of illness, and cause either sig-
   nificant impairment in social or occupational functioning or subjective
   distress,

   A. Pervasive, unwarranted suspidousness and mistrust of people as indi-
   cated by at least three of the following:

       (1) expectation of trickery or harm
       (2) hypervigilance, manifested by continual scanning of the environ-
       ment for signs of threat, or taking unneeded precautions
       {3} guardedness or secretiveness
       (4) avoidance of accepting blame when warranted
       (5) questioning the loyalty of others
       (6) intense, narrowly focused searching for confirmation of bias, with
       loss of appreciation of total context
       (7) overconcern with hidden motives and special meanings
       (8) pathological jealousy

   B. Hypersensitivrty as indicated by at least two of the following:

       (1) tendency to be easily slighted and quick to take offense
       (2) exaggeration of difficulties^ e.g., "making mountains out of mole-
       hills"
       (3) readiness to counterattack when any threat is perceived
       (4) inability to relax

   C. Restricted affectivrty as indicated by at least two of the following:

       (1) appearance of being "cold" and unemotional
       (2) pride taken in always being objective, rational, and unemotional
       (3) lack of a true sense of humor
       (4) absence of passive, soft, tender, and sentimental feelings

   D. Not due to another mental disorder such as Schizophrenia or a Para-
   noid Disorder.

 Schizoid Personality Disorder
Schizotypal Personality Disorder
Schizoid and Schizotypal Personality Disorders are new diagnostic categories.


310 Diagnostic Categories

In the past, the term Schizoid was applied to individuals with defects in the
capacity to form social relationships. In addition, the term was applied to indi-
viduals with various eccentricities of communication or behavior. Because recent
evidence suggests a possible relationship between the latter group of individuals
and a family history of chronic Schizophrenia, they are diagnosed in this manual
separately as having Schizotypal Personality Disorder (see p. 312). The term
Schizotypal is given to this category because, in addition, the features of this
disorder are frequently present in individuals with Schizophrenia, Residual Type.
    Some cases previously diagnosed as Borderline, Latent, or Simple Schizo-
phrenia are likely to be classified in this manual as Schizotypal Personality
Disorder.
    Individuals with defects in the capacity to form social relationships but
without eccentricities of communication or behavior are diagnosed here as hav-
ing Schizoid Personality Disorder, even though the term is more inclusive in
other classifications and suggests a relationship to Schizophrenia.

 301.20 Schizoid Personality Disorder
The essential feature is a Personality Disorder (p. 305) in which there is a defect
 in the capacity to form social relationships, evidenced by the absence of warm,
 tender feelings for others and indifference to praise, criticism, and the feelings
 of others. The diagnosis is not made if eccentricities of speech, behavior, or
 thought characteristic of Schizotypal Personality Disorder are present or if the
disturbance is due to a psychotic disorder such as Schizophrenia.
     Individuals with this disorder show little or no desire for social involve-
 ment, usually prefer to be "loners," and have few, if any, close friends. They
 appear reserved, withdrawn, and seclusive and usually pursue solitary interests
 or hobbies. Individuals with this disorder are usually humorless or dull and
 without affect in situations in which an emotional response would be appropri-
 ate. They usually appear "cold" and aloof.

     Associated features. Individuals with this disorder are often unable to ex-
 press aggressiveness or hostility. They may seem vague about their goals,
 indecisive in their actions, self-absorbed, absentminded, and detached from their
 environment ("not with it" or "in a fog"). Excessive daydreaming is often
 present.
     Because of a lack of social skills, males with this disorder are usually
 incapable of dating and rarely marry. Females may passively accept courtship
 and marry.

     Impairment. Social relations are, by definition, severely restricted. Occupa-
 tional functioning may be impaired, particularly if interpersonal involvement is
 required. On the other hand, individuals with this disorder may, in some in-
 stances, be capable of high occupational achievement in situations requiring
 work performance under conditions of social isolation.

     Complications. Some believe that Schizophrenia may develop as a compli-
 cation of this disorder, although others believe that in such cases, the Schizoid


                                            Personality Disorders 311

Personality Disorder merely represented the prodromal phase of the Schizo-
phrenia.

    Predisposing factors. Schizoid Disorder of Childhood or Adolescence pre-
disposes to the development of Schizoid Personality Disorder.

    Prevalence. Although the prevalence is unknown, a significant proportion
of individuals working in jobs that involve little or no contact with others, or
 living in skid-row sections of cities may have this disorder.

    Sex ratio and familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. In Schizotypal Personality Disorder there are eccen-
tricities of communication or behavior, and these preclude a diagnosis of Schiz-
oid Personality Disorder.
    In Avoidant Personality Disorder, social isolation is due to hypersensitivity
to rejection, but a desire to enter social relationships is present if there are
strong guarantees of uncritical acceptance. In contrast, individuals with Schizoid
Personality Disorder have no desire for social relations.
    In Schizoid Disorder of Childhood or Adolescence there is a similar clinical
picture and this diagnosis preempts the diagnosis of Schizoid Personality Dis-
order if the individual is under 18.

  Diagnostic criteria for Schizoid Personality Disorder
  The following are characteristic of the individual's current and long-term
  functioning/ are not limited to episodes of illness, and cause either sig-
  nificant impairment in social or occupational functioning or subjective
  distress.

  A. Emotional coldness and aloofness, and absence of warm, tender feel-
  ings for others.

  B. Indifference to praise or criticism or to the feelings of others.

  C. Close friendships with no more than one or two persons, including
  family members.

  D. No eccentricities of speech, behavior, or thought characteristic of
  Schizotypal Personality Disorder.

  E Not due to a psychotic disorder such as Schizophrenia or Paranoid
  Disorder.

  F. If under 18, does not meet the criteria for Schizoid Disorder of Child-
  hood or Adolescence.


312 Diagnostic Categories

301.22 Schizotypal Personality Disorder
The essential feature is a Personality Disorder (p. 305) in which there are various
oddities of thought, perception, speech, and behavior that are not severe enough
to meet the criteria for Schizophrenia. No single feature is invariably present.
The disturbance in the content of thought may include magical thinking (or in
children, bizarre fantasies or preoccupations), ideas of reference, or paranoid
ideation. Perceptual disturbances may include recurrent illusions, depersonaliza-
tion, or derealization (not associated with panic attacks). Often, speech shows
marked peculiarities: concepts may be expressed unclearly or oddly or words
used deviantly, but never to the point of loosening of associations or incoher-
ence. Frequently, but not invariably, the behavioral manifestations include social
isolation and constricted or inappropriate affect that interferes with rapport in
face-to-face interaction.

    Associated features. Varying admixtures of anxiety, depression, and other
dysphoric moods are common. Features of Borderline Personality Disorder (p.
321) are often present, and in some cases both diagnoses may be warranted.
During periods of extreme stress transient psychotic symptoms may be present.
Because of peculiarities in thinking, individuals with Schizotypal Personality
Disorder are prone to eccentric convictions, such as bigotry and fringe religious
beliefs.

    Impairment. Usually some interference with social or occupational func-
tioning occurs.

    Complications. Psychotic disorders such as Brief Reactive Psychosis may
occur.

    Prevalance and sex ratio. No information.

    Familial pattern. There is some evidence that chronic Schizophrenia is more
common among family members of individuals with Schizotypal Personality
Disorder than among the general population.

    Differential diagnosis. In Schizophrenia, Residual Type, there is a history
of an active phase of Schizophrenia with psychotic symptoms. When psychotic
symptoms occur in Schizotypal Personality Disorder, they are transient and not
as severe. In Schizoid Personality Disorder and Avoidant Personality Disorder,
there are no oddities of behavior, thinking, perception, and speech as are present
in Schizotypal Personality Disorder. Frequently, individuals with Borderline
Personality Disorder also meet the criteria for Schizotypal Personality Disorder;
in such instances, both diagnoses should be recorded. In Depersonalization Dis-
order, oddities of thought, speech, and behavior are not present, although in rare
cases both disorders may coexist.

  Diagnostic criteria for Schizotypal Personality Disorder
  The following are characteristic of the individual's current and long-term


                                            Personality Disorders 313

  functioning, are not limited to episodes of illness, and cause either sig-
  nificant impairment in social or occupational functioning or subjective
  distress.

  A. At least four of the following:
      (1) magical thinking, e.g., superstitiousness, clairvoyance, telepathy,
      "6th sense/' "others can feel my feelings'' (in children and adoles-
      cents, bizarre fantasies or preoccupations)
      (2) ideas of reference
      (3) social isolation, e.g., no close friends or confidants, social con-
      tacts limited to essential everyday tasks
      (4) recurrent illusions, sensing the presence of a force or person not
      actually present (e.g., "I felt as if my dead mother were in the room
      with me"), depersonatization, or derealization not associated with
      panic attacks
      (5) odd speech (without loosening of associations or incoherence),
      e.g., speech that is digressive, vague, overelaborate, circumstantial,
      metaphorical
      (6) inadequate rapport in face-to-face interaction due to constricted
      or inappropriate affect, e.g., aloof, cold
      (7) suspiciousness or paranoid ideation
      (8) undue social anxiety or hypersensitivity to real or imagined
      criticism

  B. Does not meet the criteria for Schizophrenia.

301.50 Histrionic Personality Disorder
The essential feature is a Personality Disorder (p. 305) in which there are overly
dramatic, reactive, and intensely expressed behavior and characteristic distur-
bances in interpersonal relationships.
    Individuals with this disorder are lively and dramatic and are always
drawing attention to themselves. They are prone to exaggeration and often act
out a role, such as the "victim" or the "princess," without being aware of it.
    Behavior is overly reactive and intensely expressed. Minor stimuli give rise
to emotional excitability, such as irrational, angry outbursts or tantrums. Indi-
viduals with this disorder crave novelty, stimulation, and excitement and quickly
become bored with normal routines.
    Interpersonal relationships show characteristic disturbances. Initially, peo-
ple with this disorder are frequently perceived as shallow and lacking genuine-
ness, though superficially charming and appealing. They are often quick to form
friendships; but once a relationship is established they can become demanding,
egocentric, and inconsiderate; manipulative suicidal threats, gestures, or at-
tempts may be made; there may be a constant demand for reassurance because
of feelings of helplessness and dependency. In some cases both patterns are


314 Diagnostic Categories

present in the same relationship. These people's actions are frequently inconsis-
tent, and may be misinterpreted by others.
   Such individuals are typically attractive and seductive. They attempt to
control the opposite sex or enter into a dependent relationship. Flights into
romantic fantasy are common; in both sexes overt behavior often is a caricature
of femininity. The actual quality of their sexual relationships is variable. Some
individuals are promiscuous; others, nai've and sexually unresponsive; but still
others have apparently normal sexual adjustment.
    In other classifications this category is termed Hysterical Personality.

    Associated features. Individuals with this disorder often experience periods
of intense dissatisfaction and a variety of dysphoric moods, usually related to
obvious changes in external circumstances, such as a breakup with a lover. They
may make suicidal gestures or attempts.
    Usually these individuals show little interest in intellectual achievement
and careful, analytic thinking, though they are often creative and imaginative.
    Individuals with this disorder tend to be impressionable and easily influ-
enced by others or by fads. They are apt to be overly trusting of others,
suggestible, and show an initially positive response to any strong authority
figure who they think can provide a magical solution for their problems. Though
they adopt convictions strongly and readily, their judgment is not firmly rooted,
and they often play hunches.
    Frequent complaints of poor health, such as weakness or headaches, or
subjective feelings of depersonalization may be present. During periods of
extreme stress, there may be transient psychotic symptoms of insufficient
severity or duration to warrant an additional diagnosis.
    When the disorder is present in men, it is sometimes associated with a
homosexual arousal pattern.

    Impairment. Interpersonal relations are usually stormy and ungratifying. In
extreme cases there is gross inability to function.

    Complications. A common complication is Substance Use Disorder, particu-
larly in women. Additional complications include Major Depression, Dysthymic
Disorder, Brief Reactive Psychosis, Conversion Disorder, and Somatization
Disorder.
    Predisposing factors. No information.

    Prevalence and sex ratio. The disorder is apparently common, and diag-
nosed far more frequently in females than in males.

    Familial pattern. The disorder is apparently more common among family
members than in the general population.

    Differential diagnosis. In Somatization Disorder complaints of physical ill-
ness dominate the clinical picture, although histrionic features are common. In
many cases Somatization Disorder and Histrionic Personality Disorder coexist.


                                            Personality Disorders 315

    Borderline Personality Disorder is also often present; in such cases both
diagnoses should be made.


  Diagostic criteria for Histrionic Personality Disorder
  The following are characteristic of the Individual's current and long-term
  functioning, are not limited to episodes of illness, and cause either sig-
  nificant impairment in social or occupational functioning or subjective
  distress.

  A. Behavior that is overly dramatic, reactive, and intensely expressed/
  as indicated by at least three of the following:

      (1) self-dramatization, e.g., exaggerated expression of emotions
      (2) incessant drawing of attention to oneself
      (3) craving for activity and excitement
      (4) over reaction to minor events
      (5) irrational, angry outbursts or tantrums

  B. Characteristic disturbances in interpersonal relationships as indicated
  by at least two of the following:

      (1) perceived by others as shallow and lacking genuineness, even
      if superficially warm and charming
      (2) egocentric, self-indulgent, and inconsiderate of others
      (3) vain and demanding
      (4) dependent, helpless, constantly seeking reassurance
      (5) prone to manipulative suicidal threats, gestures, or attempts

301.81 Narcissistic Personality Disorder
The essential feature is a Personality Disorder (p. 305) in which there are a
grandiose sense of self-importance or uniqueness; preoccupation with fantasies
of unlimited success; exhibitionistic need for constant attention and admiration;
characteristic responses to threats to self-esteem; and characteristic disturbances
in interpersonal relationships, such as feelings of entitlement, interpersonal
exploitativeness, relationships that alternate between the extremes of overideal-
ization and devaluation, and lack of empathy.
    The exaggerated sense of self-importance may be manifested as extreme
self-centeredness and self-absorption. Abilities and achievements tend to be
unrealistically overestimated. Frequently the sense of self-importance alternates
with feelings of special unworthiness. For example, a student who ordinarily
expects an A and receives an A minus may at that moment express the view
that he or she, more than any other student, is revealed to all as a failure.
    Fantasies involving unrealistic goals may involve achieving unlimited abil-
ity, power, wealth, brilliance, beauty, or ideal love. Although these fantasies


 316 Diagnostic Categories

frequently substitute for realistic activity, when these goals are actually pursued,
it is often with a "driven," pleasureless quality, and an ambition that cannot be
satisfied.
    Individuals with this disorder are constantly seeking admiration and atten-
tion, and are more concerned with appearances than with substance. For exam-
ple, there might be more concern about being seen with the "right" people than
having close friends.
    Self-esteem is often fragile; the individual may be preoccupied with how
 well he or she is doing and how well he or she is regarded by others. In response
 to criticism, defeat, or disappointment, there is either a cool indifference or
marked feelings of rage, inferiority, shame, humiliation, or emptiness.
    Interpersonal relationships are invariably disturbed. A lack of empathy
 (inability to recognize and experience how others feel) is common. For example,
 annoyance and surprise may be expressed when a friend who is seriously ill has
 to cancel a date.
    Entitlement, the expectation of special favors without assuming reciprocal
responsibilities, is usually present. For example, surprise and anger are felt
 because others will not do what is wanted; more is expected from people than
is reasonable.
    Interpersonal exploitativeness, in which others are taken advantage of in
 order to indulge one's own desires or for self-aggrandizement, is common; and
 the personal integrity and rights of others are disregarded. For example, a
 writer might plagiarize the ideas of someone befriended for that purpose.
    Relations with others lack sustained, positive regard. Close relationships
 tend to alternate between idealization and devaluation ("splitting"). For exam-
 ple, a man repeatedly becomes involved with women whom he alternately
adores and despises.

    Associated features. Frequently, many of the features of Histrionic, Border-
 line, and Antisocial Personality Disorders are present; in some cases more than
one diagnosis may be warranted.
    During periods of severe stress transient psychotic symptoms of insuffi-
 cient severity or duration to warrant an additional diagnosis are sometimes seen.
    Depressed mood is extremely common. Frequently there is painful self-
 consciousness, preoccupation with grooming and remaining youthful, and
 chronic, intense envy of others. Preoccupation with aches and pains and other
 physical symptoms may also be present. Personal deficits, defeats, or irresponsi-
 ble behavior may be justified by rationalization, prevarication, or outright lying.
 Feelings may be faked in order to impress others.

    Impairment. By definition, some impairment in interpersonal relations al-
 ways exists. Occupational functioning may be unimpaired, or may be interfered
 with by depressed mood, interpersonal difficulties, or the pursuit of unrealistic
 goals.

    Complications. Dysthymic Disorder, Major Depression and psychotic dis-
orders such as Brief Reactive Psychosis are possible complications.


                                            Personality Disorders 317

    Prevalence. This disorder appears to be more common recently than in the
past, although this may only be due to greater professional interest in the
category.

    Predisposing factors, sex ratio, and familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. Borderline and Histrionic Personality Disorders are
often also present; in such instances, multiple diagnoses should be given.


  Diagnostic criteria for Narcissistic Personality Disorder
  The following are characteristic of the-individual's current and long-term
  functioning, are not limited to episodes of illness, and cause either
  significant impairment in social or occupational functioning or subjective
  distress;

  A. Grandiose sense of self-importance or uniqueness, e.g., exaggera-
  tion of achievements and talents, focus on the special nature of one's
  problems.

  B. Preoccupation with fantasies of unlimited success, power, brilliance/
  beauty, or ideal love.

  C Exhibitionism: the person requires constant attention and admiration.

  D. Cool indifference or marked feelings of rage, inferiority, shame,
  humiliation, or emptiness tn response to criticism, indifference of others,
  or defeat

  E. At least two of the following characteristic of disturbances in interper-
  sonal relationships:

      (1) entitlement: expectation of special favors without assuming re-
      ciprocal responsibilities, e.g., surprise and anger that people will not
      do what is wanted
      (2) interpersonal exploitativeness: taking advantage of others to in-
      dulge own desires or for seJf-aggrandizement; disregard for the per-
      sonal integrity and rights of others
      (3) relationships that characteristically alternate between the ex-
      tremes of overidealizatJon and devaluation
      (4) lack of empathy: inability to recognize how others feel, e.g.,
      unable to appreciate the distress of someone who is seriously ill.

301.70 Antisocial Personality Disorder
The essential feature is a Personality Disorder (p. 305) in which there are a
history of continuous and chronic antisocial behavior in which the rights of


318 Diagnostic Categories

others are violated, persistence into adult life of a pattern of antisocial behavior
that began before the age of 15, and failure to sustain good job performance
over a period of several years (although this may not be evident in individuals
who are self-employed or who have not been in a position to demonstrate this
feature, e.g., students or housewives). The antisocial behavior is not due to
either severe Mental Retardation, Schizophrenia, or manic episodes.
    Lying, stealing, fighting, truancy, and resisting authority are typical early
childhood signs. In adolescence, unusually early or aggressive sexual behavior,
excessive drinking, and use of illicit drugs are frequent. In adulthood, these
kinds of behavior continue, with the addition of inability to sustain consistent
work performance or to function as a responsible parent and failure to accept
social norms with respect to lawful behavior. After age 30 the more flagrant
aspects may diminish, particularly sexual promiscuity, fighting, criminality, and
vagrancy.

    Associated features. Despite the stereotype of a normal mental status in
this disorder, frequently there are signs of personal distress, including com-
plaints of tension, inability to tolerate boredom, depression, and the conviction
(often correct) that others are hostile toward them. The interpersonal difficulties
and dysphoria tend to persist into late adult life even when the more flagrant
antisocial behavior has diminished. Almost invariably there is markedly impaired
capacity to sustain lasting, close, warm, and responsible relationships with
family, friends, or sexual partners.

    Impairment. The disorder is often extremely incapacitating, resulting in
failure to become an independent, self-supporting adult and in many years of
institutionalization, more commonly penal than medical. It is possible, however,
for individuals who have some of the features of the disorder to achieve political
and economic success; but these people virtually never present the full picture
of the disorder, lacking in particular the early onset in childhood that usually
interferes with educational achievement and prohibits most public careers.

    Complications. Illiteracy and Substance Use Disorders are frequent com-
plications.

    Predisposing factors. Predisposing factors are Attention Deficit Disorder
and Conduct Disorder during prepuberty. The absence of parental discipline
apparently increases the likelihood that Conduct Disorder will develop into
Antisocial Personality Disorder. Other predisposing factors include extreme
poverty, removal from the home, and growing up without parental figures of
both sexes.

    Age at onset. By definition the disorder begins before the age of 15. Fe-
males7 first symptoms usually begin in puberty, whereas males7 are usually
obvious in early childhood.


                                            Personality Disorders 319

    Sex ratio. The disorder is much more common in males than in females.

    Prevalence. Estimates of the prevalence of Antisocial Personality Disorder
for American men are about 3%, and for American women, less than 1%. The
disorder is more common in lower-class populations, partly because it is associ-
ated with impaired earning capacity and partly because fathers of those with
the disorder frequently have the disorder themselves, and consequently their
children often grow up in impoverished homes.

    Familial pattern. Antisocial Personality Disorder is particularly common in
the fathers of both males and females with the disorder. Studies attempting to
separate genetic from environmental influences within the family suggest that
both are important, since there seems to be inheritance from biological fathers
separated from their offspring early in life and a social influence from adoptive
fathers. Because of a tendency toward assortative mating, the children of women
with Antisocial Personality Disorder who have the disorder themselves are
likely to have both a mother and a father with the disorder.

    Differential diagnosis. Conduct Disorder consists of the typical childhood
signs of Antisocial Personality Disorder. Since such behavior may terminate
spontaneously or evolve into other disorders such as Schizophrenia, a diagnosis
of Antisocial Personality Disorder should not be made in children; it is reserved
for adults (18 or over), who have had time to show the full longitudinal pattern.
    Adult Antisocial Behavior, in the category Conditions Not Attributable to
a Mental Disorder, should be considered when criminal or other aggressive or
antisocial behavior occurs in individuals who do not meet the full criteria for
Antisocial Personality Disorder and whose antisocial behavior cannot be attrib-
uted to any other mental disorder.
    When Substance Abuse and antisocial behavior begin in childhood and
continue into adult life, both Substance Use Disorder and Antisocial Personality
Disorder should be diagnosed if the criteria for each disorder are met, regardless
of the extent to which some of the antisocial behavior may be a consequence of
the Substance Use Disorder, e.g., illegal selling of drugs, or the assaultive
behavior associated with Alcohol Intoxication. When antisocial behavior in an
adult is associated with a Substance Use Disorder, the diagnosis of Antisocial
Personality Disorder is not made unless the childhood signs of Antisocial Per-
sonality Disorder were also present and continued without a remission of five
years or more between age 15 and adult life.
    Severe Mental Retardation and Schizophrenia preempt the diagnosis of
Antisocial Personality Disorder, because at the present time there is no way to
determine when antisocial behavior that occurs in an individual with severe
Mental Retardation or Schizophrenia is due to these more severe disorders or to
Antisocial Personality Disorder.
    Manic episodes may be associated with antisocial behavior. The differential
diagnosis is easily made by noting the absence of severe behavior problems in
childhood and the sudden change in adult behavior.


320 Diagnostic Categories

  Diagnostic criteria for Antisocial Personality Disorder
  A. Current age at least 18.

  B. Onset before age 15 as indicated by a history of three or more of the
  following before that age:

      (1) truancy (positive if it amounted to at least five days per year
      for at least two years, not including the last year of school)
      (2) expulsion or suspension from school for misbehavior
      (3) delinquency (arrested or referred to juvenile court because of
      behavior)
      (4) running away from home overnight at least twice while living
      in parental or parental surrogate home
      (5) persistent lying
      (6) repeated sexual intercourse in a casual relationship
      (7) repeated drunkenness or substance abuse
      (8) thefts
     (9) vandalism
    (10) school grades markedly below expectations in relation to esti-
    mated or known IQ (may have resulted in repeating a year)
    (11) chronic violations of rules at home and/or at school (other than
    truancy)
    (12) initiation of fights

 C At least four of the following manifestations of the disorder since
 age 18:

      (1) inability to sustain consistent work behavior, as indicated by
      any of the following: (a) too frequent job changes (e.g., three or
     more jobs in five years not accounted for by nature of job or eco-
      nomic or seasonal fluctuation), (6) significant unemployment (e.g.,
      six months or more in five years when expected to work), (c) serious
      absenteeism from work (e.g., average three days or more of lateness
      or absence per month, (of) walking off several jobs without other
      jobs in sight (Note: similar behavior in an academic setting during
      the last few years of school may substitute for this criterion in indi-
      viduals who by reason of their age or circumstances have not had an
      opportunity to demonstrate occupational adjustment)
      (2) lack of ability to function as a responsible parent as evidenced by
      one or more of the following: (a) child's malnutrition, (b) child's
      illness resulting from lack of minimal hygiene standards, (c) failure
      to obtain medicaal care for a seriously ill child, (d) child's depen-
      dence on neighbors or nonresident relatives for food or shelter, (e)
      failure to arrange for a caretaker for a child under six when parent


                                            Personality Disorders 321

      is away from home, (0 repeated squandering, on personal items, of
      money required for household necessities
       (3) failure to accept social norms with respect to lawful behavior, as
      indicated by any of the following: repeated thefts, illegal occupation
       (pimping, prostitution, fencing, selling drugs), multiple arrests, a
      felony conviction
       (4) Inability to maintain enduring attachment to a sexual partner as
      indicated by two or more divorces and/or separations (whether legally
      married or not), desertion of spouse, promiscuity (ten or more sexual
      partners within one year)
       (5) irritability and aggressiveness as indicated by repeated physical
      fights or assault (not required by one's job or to defend someone or
      oneself), including spouse or child beating
       (6) failure to honor financial obligations, as indicated by repeated
      defaulting on debts, failure to provide child support, failure to sup-
      port other dependents on a regular basis
       (7) failure to plan ahead, or impulsivity, as indicated by traveling
      from place to place without a prearranged job or clear goal for the
      period of travel or clear idea about when the travel would terminate,
      or lack of a fixed address for a month or more
      (8) disregard for the truth as indicated by repeated lying, use of
      aliases, "conning" others for personal profit
      (9) recklessness, as indicated by driving while intoxicated or recur-
       rent speeding

  D. A pattern of continuous antisocial behavior in which the rights of
  others are violated, with no intervening period of at least five years with-
  out antisocial behavior between age 15 and the present time (except when
  the individual was bedridden or confined in a hospital or penal institu-
  tion).

  E» Antisocial behavior is not due to either Severe Mental Retardation,
  Schizophrenia or manic episodes.

301.83 Borderline Personality Disorder
The essential feature is a Personality Disorder (p. 305) in which there is in-
stability in a variety of areas, including interpersonal behavior, mood, and self-
image. No single feature is invariably present. Interpersonal relations are often
intense and unstable, with marked shifts of attitude over time. Frequently there
is impulsive and unpredictable behavior that is potentially physically self-
damaging. Mood is often unstable, with marked shifts from a normal mood to
a dysphoric mood or with inappropriate, intense anger or lack of control of
anger. A profound identity disturbance may be manifested by uncertainty about
several issues relating to identity, such as self-image, gender identity, or long-
term goals or values. There may be problems tolerating being alone, and chronic
feelings of emptiness or boredom.


322 Diagnostic Categories

    Some conceptualize this condition as a level of personality organization
rather than as a specific Personality Disorder. As noted below, Borderline
Personality Disorder is frequently associated with other Personality Disorders.

    Associated features. Frequently this disorder is accompanied by many fea-
tures of other Personality Disorders such as Schizotypal, Histrionic, Narcissistic,
and Antisocial Personality Disorders. In many cases more than one diagnosis is
warranted. Quite often social contrariness and a generally pessimistic outlook
are seen. Alternation between dependency and self-assertion is common. During
periods of extreme stress transient psychotic symptoms of insufficient severity
or duration to warrant an additional diagnosis may occur.

    Impairment. Often there is considerable interference with social or occupa-
tional functioning.

    Complications. Dysthymic Disorder and Major Depression as well as psy-
chotic disorders such as Brief Reactive Psychosis may be complications.

    Sex ratio. The disorder is more commonly diagnosed in women.

    Prevalence. Borderline Personality Disorder is apparently common.

    Predisposing factors and familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. In Identity Disorder there is a similar clinical picture
and this diagnosis preempts the diagnosis of Borderline Personality Disorder if
the individual is under 18. In Cyclothymic Disorder there is also affective in-
stability, but in Borderline Personality Disorder there are no hypomanic periods.
However, in some cases, both disorders may coexist.

  Diagnostic criteria for Borderline Personality Disorder
  The following are characteristic of the individual's current and long-
  term functioning, are not limited to episodes of illness, and cause either
  significant impairment in social or occupational functioning or subjective
  distress.

  A. At least five of the following are required:

      (1) impulsivity or unpredictability in at least two areas that are
      potentially self-damaging, e.g., spending, sex, gambling, substance
      use, shoplifting, overeating, physically self-damaging acts
      (2) a pattern of unstable and intense interpersonal relationships,
      e.g., marked shifts of attitude, idealization, devaluation, manipula-
      tion (consistently using others for one's own ends)
      (3) inappropriate, intense anger or lack of control of anger, e.g.,
      frequent displays of temper, constant anger


                                           Personality Disorders 323

      (4) identity disturbance manifested by uncertainty about several
      issues relating to identity, such as self-image, gender identity, long-
      term goals or career choice, friendship patterns, values, and loyalties,
      e.g., "Who am I?", "I feel like I am my sister when 1 am good"
      (5) affective instability: marked shifts from normal mood to depres-
      sion, irritability, or anxiety, usually, .'lasting a few hours and only
      rarely more than a few days, with a return to normal mood
      {6} intolerance of being alone, e.g., frantic efforts to avoid being
      alone, depressed when alone
      (7) physically self-damaging acts, e.g., suicidal gestures, self-mutila-
      tion, recurrent accidents or physical fights
      (8) chronic feelings of emptiness or boredom

  B, If under 18, does not meet the criteria for Identity Disorder,

301.82 Avoidant Personality Disorder
The essential feature is a Personality Disorder (p. 305) in which there are
hypersensitivity to potential rejection, humiliation, or shame; an unwillingness
to enter into relationships unless given unusually strong guarantees of uncritical
acceptance; social withdrawal in spite of a desire for affection and acceptance;
and low self-esteem.
    Individuals with this disorder are exquisitely sensitive to rejection, humilia-
tion, or shame. Most people are somewhat concerned about how others assess
them, but these individuals are devastated by the slightest hint of disapproval.
Consequently, they withdraw from opportunities for developing close relation-
ships because of a fearful expectation of being belittled or humiliated. They
may have one or two close friends, but these relationships are contingent on
unconditional approval.
    Unlike individuals with Schizoid Personality Disorder, who are socially
isolated but have no desire for social relations, those with Avoidant Personality
Disorder yearn for affection and acceptance. They are distressed by their lack
of ability to relate comfortably to others and suffer from low self-esteem.

    Associated features. Depression, anxiety, and anger at oneself for failing to
develop social relations are commonly present.

    Impairment. Social relations are, by definition, severely restricted. Occupa-
tional functioning may be impaired, particularly if interpersonal involvement is
required.

    Complications. Social Phobia may be a complication of this disorder.

    Predisposing factors. Avoidant Disorder of Childhood or Adolescence pre-
disposes to the development of this disorder.

    Prevalence. Avoidant Personality Disorder is apparently common.


 324 Diagnostic Categories

     Familial pattern. No information.

     Differential diagnosis. In Schizoid Personality Disorder there is also social
 isolation, but without a desire for social involvement and with an indifference
 to criticism.
     In Social Phobias humiliation is a concern, but a specific situation, such as
 public speaking, is avoided rather than personal relationships. However, as
 noted in Complications, these disorders may coexist.
     In Avoidant Disorder of Childhood or Adolescence there is a similar clinical
 picture and this diagnosis preempts the diagnosis of Avoidant Personality Dis-
 order if the individual is under 18.

   Diagnostic criteria for Avoidant Personality Disorder
   The following are characteristic of the individual's current and long-term
   functioning, are not limited to episodes of illness, and cause either sig-
   nificant impairment in social or occupational functioning or subjective
   distress,

   A. Hypersensitivity to rejection, e.g., apprehensively alert to signs of
  social derogation, interprets innocuous events as ridicule.

   B. Unwillingness to enter into relationships unless given unusually strong
  guarantees of uncritical acceptance.

  C. Social withdrawal, e.g., distances self from close personal attachments,
  engages in peripheral social and vocational roles.

  D. Desire for affection and acceptance.

  E. Low self-esteem, e.g., devalues self-achievements and is overly dis-
  mayed by personal shortcomings.

  F. If under 18, does not meet the criteria for Avoidant Disorder of Child-
  hood or Adolescence.

301.60 Dependent Personality Disorder
The essential feature is a Personality Disorder (p. 305) in which the individual
passively allows others to assume responsibility for major areas of his or her life
because of a lack of self-confidence and an inability to function independently;
the individual subordinates his or her own needs to those of others on whom
he or she is dependent in order to avoid any possibility of having to be self-
reliant.
    Such individuals leave major decisions to others. For example, an adult with
this disorder will typically assume a passive role and allow his or her spouse to
decide where they should live, what kind of job he or she should have, and with


                                            Personality Disorders 325

 which neighbors they should be friendly. A child or adolescent with this dis-
 order may allow his or her parents to decide what he or she should wear, with
 whom to associate, and how to spend free time.
     Generally individuals with this disorder are unwilling to make demands on
 the people they depend on for fear of jeopardizing the relationships and being
 forced to rely on themselves. For example, a wife with this disorder may tolerate
 a physically abusive husband for fear that he will leave her.
     Individuals with this disorder invariably lack self-confidence. They tend to
 belittle their abilities and assets. For example, an individual with this disorder
 may constantly refer to himself or herself as "stupid."

    Associated features. Frequently another Personality Disorder is present,
 such as Histrionic, Schizotypal, Narcissistic, or Avoidant Personality Disorder.
Anxiety and depression are common. Unless the individual has managed to
 secure a permanent relationship that satisfies his or her dependency needs, there
 is invariably preoccupation with the possibility of being abandoned.
    The individual often experiences intense discomfort when alone for more
 than brief periods of time.

    Impairment. Occupational functioning may be impaired if the nature of the
job requires independence. Social relations tend to be limited to those with the
few individuals on whom one is dependent.

    Complications. Dysthymic Disorder and Major Depression are common
complications.

    Predisposing factors. Chronic physical illness may predispose to the devel-
opment of this disorder in children and adolescents. Some believe that Separa-
tion Anxiety Disorder and Avoidant Disorder of Childhood or Adolescence
predispose to the development of Dependent Personality Disorder.

    Prevalence and sex ratio. The disorder is apparently common, and is diag-
nosed more frequently in women.

    Familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. In Agoraphobia, dependent behavior is common, but
the individual is more likely to actively insist that others assume responsibility,
whereas in Dependent Personality Disorder, the individual passively maintains
a dependent relationship.

  Diagnostic criteria lor Dependent Personality Disorder
  The following are characteristic of the individual's current and teng-term
  functioning, are not limited to episodes of Illness, and cause either sig-
  nificant impairment in social or occupational functioning or subjective
  distress.


326 Diagnostic Categories

  A. Passively allows others to assume responsibility for major areas of
  life because of inability to function independently (e.g., lets spouse de-
  cide what kind of job he or she should have).

  B. Subordinates own needs to those of persons on whom he or she de-
  pends in order to avoid any possibility of having to rely on self, e.g.,
  tolerates abusive spouse.

  C Lacks self-confidence, e.g., sees self as helpless, stupid.

301.40 Compulsive Personality Disorder
The essential feature is a Personality Disorder (p. 305) in which there generally
are restricted ability to express warm and tender emotions; perfectionism that
interferes with the ability to grasp "the big picture"; insistence that others
submit to his or her way of doing things; excessive devotion to work and
productivity to the exclusion of pleasure; and indecisiveness.
   Individuals with this disorder are stingy with their emotions and material
possessions. For example, they rarely give compliments or gifts. Everyday rela-
tionships have a conventional, formal, and serious quality. Others often perceive
these individuals as stilted and "stiff."
   Preoccupation with rules, efficiency, trivial details, procedures, or form
interferes with the ability to take a broad view of things. For example, such an
individual, having misplaced a list of things to be done, will spend an inordinate
amount of time looking for the list rather than spend a few moments to re-
create the list from memory and proceed with accomplishing the activities. Time
is poorly allocated, the most important tasks being left to the last moment.
Although efficiency and perfection are idealized, they are rarely attained.
   Individuals with this disorder are always mindful of their relative status
in dominance-submission relationships. Although they resist the authority of
others, they stubbornly insist that people conform to their way of doing things.
They are unaware of the feelings of resentment or hurt that this behavior evokes
in others. For example, a husband may insist that his wife complete errands for
him regardless of her plans.
   Work and productivity are prized to the exclusion of pleasure and the
value of interpersonal relationships. When pleasure is considered, it is something
to be planned and worked for. However, the individual usually keeps postponing
the pleasurable activity, such as a vacation, so that it may never occur.
   Decision-making is avoided, postponed, or protracted, perhaps because of
an inordinate fear of making a mistake. For example, assignments cannot be
completed on time because the individual is ruminating about priorities.

   Associated features. Individuals with this disorder may complain of diffi-
culty expressing tender feelings. Considerable distress is often associated with
their indecisiveness and general ineffectiveness. Their speech may be circum-
stantial. Depressed mood is common. Individuals with this disorder tend to be


                                            Personality Disorders 327

 excessively conscientious, moralistic, scrupulous, and judgmental of self and
 others. (For example, a man believed it was "sinful" for his neighbor to leave
 his child's bicycle in the rain.) When they are unable to control others, a
 situation, or their environment, they often ruminate about the situation and
 become angry, although the anger is usually not expressed directly. (For exam-
 ple, a man may be angry when service in a restaurant is poor, but instead of
 complaining to the management, ruminates about how much he will leave as a
 tip.) Frequently there is extreme sensitivity to social criticism, especially if it
 comes from someone with considerable status or authority.

     Impairment. This disorder frequently is quite incapacitating, particularly in
 its effect on occupational functioning.

    Complications. Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, Hypochondriasis, Major
 Depression, and Dysthymic Disorder may be complications. Many of the fea-
 tures of Compulsive Personality Disorder are apparently present in individuals
 who develop myocardial infarction.

    Predisposing factors. No information.

    Prevalence and sex ratio. The disorder is apparently common and is more
frequently diagnosed in men.

    Familial pattern. The disorder is apparently more common among family
members than in the general population.

    Differential diagnosis. In Obsessive Compulsive Disorder there are, by
definition, true obsessions and compulsions, which are not present in Compul-
sive Personality Disorder. However, if the criteria for both disorders are met,
both diagnoses should be recorded.

  Diagnostic criteria for Compulsive Personality Disorder
  At least four of the following are characteristic of the individual's current
  and long-term functioning, are not limited to episodes of illness, and
  cause either significant impairment in social or occupational functioning
  or subjective distress.
      (1) restricted ability to express warm and tender emotions, e.g., the
      individual is unduly conventional, serious and formal, and stingy
      (2) perfectionism that interferes with the ability to grasp "the big
      picture," e.g., preoccupation with trivial details, rules, order, orga-
      nization, schedules, and lists
      (3) insistence that others submit to his or her way of doing things,
      and lack of awareness of the feelings elicited by this behavior, e.g.,
      a husband stubbornly insists his wife complete errands for him re-
      gardless of her plans


328 Diagnostic Categories

      (4) excessive devotion to work and productivity to the exclusion of
      pleasure and the value of interpersonal relationships
      (5) indecisiveness: decision-making is either avoided, postponed,
      or protracted, perhaps because of an inordinate fear of making a
      mistake, e.g., the individual cannot get assignments done on time
      because of ruminating about priorities

301.84 Passive-Aggressive Personality Disorder
The essential feature is a Personality Disorder (p. 305) in which there is re-
sistance to demands for adequate performance in both occupational and social
functioning; the resistance is expressed indirectly rather than directly. The
consequence is pervasive and persistent social or occupational ineffectiveness,
even when more self-assertive and effective behavior is possible. The name of
this disorder is based on the assumption that such individuals are passively
expressing covert aggression.
    Individuals with this disorder habitually resent and oppose demands to
increase or maintain a given level of functioning. This occurs most clearly in
work situations, but is also evident in social functioning. The resistance is
expressed indirectly, through such maneuvers as procrastination, dawdling,
stubbornness, intentional inefficiency, and "forgetfulness." For example, when
an executive gives a subordinate some material to review for a meeting the next
morning, rather than complain that he or she has no time to do the work, the
subordinate may misplace or misfile the material and thus attain his or her goal
by passively resisting the demand on him or her. Similarly, when an individual
always comes late to appointments, promises to help make arrangements for
particular events but never does, and keeps "forgetting" to bring important
documents to club meetings, he or she is passively resisting demands made on
him or her by others.
    The individual is ineffective both socially and occupationally because of
the passive-resistant behavior. For example, job promotions are not offered
because of the individual's intentional inefficiency. A housewife with the dis-
order fails to do the laundry or to stock the kitchen with food because of
procrastination and dawdling.
    For the diagnosis to be made, it is essential that this pattern of behavior
occur in a variety of contexts in which more adaptive functioning is clearly
possible.

    Associated features. Often individuals with this disorder are dependent and
lack self-confidence. Typically, they are pessimistic about the future but have
no realization that their behavior is responsible for their difficulties. Although
the individual may experience conscious resentment against authority figures,
he or she never connects his or her passive-resistant behavior with this resent-
ment.

    Impairment. By definition, some impairment in social and occupational
functioning is always present.


                                            Personality Disorders 329

    Complications. Frequent complications include Major Depression, Dys-
thymic Disorder, and Alcohol Abuse or Dependence.

    Predisposing factors. Oppositional Disorder in childhood or adolescence
apparently predisposes to the development of this disorder.

    Prevalence, sex ratio, and familial pattern. No information.

    Differential diagnosis. In Oppositional Disorder there may be a similar
clinical picture and this diagnosis preempts the diagnosis of Passive-Aggressive
Personality Disorder if the individual is under 18.
    Passive-aggressive maneuvers that are used in certain situations in which
assertive behavior is discouraged or actually punished and that are not part of
a pervasive pattern of personality functioning do not warrant this diagnosis.

  Diagnostic criteria for Passive-Aggressive Personality Disorder
  The following are characteristic of the individual's current and long-term
  functioning, and are not limited to episodes of illness.

  A. Resistance to demands for adequate performance in both occupa-
  tional and social functioning.

  B. Resistance expressed indirectly through at least two of the following:

      (1) procrastination
      (2) dawdling
      (3) stubbornness
      (4) intentional inefficiency
      (5) "forgetfulness"

  C. As a consequence of A and B, pervasive and long-standing social and
  occupational ineffectiveness (including in roles of housewife or student),
  e.g., intentional inefficiency that has prevented job promotion.

  D. Persistence of the behavior pattern even under circumstances in which
  more self-assertive and effective behavior is possible.

  E. Does not meet the criteria for any other Personality Disorder, and if
  under age 18, does not meet the criteria for Oppositional Disorder.

301.89 Atypical, Mixed, or Other Personality Disorder
If an individual qualifies for any of the specific Personality Disorders, that
category should be noted even if some features from other categories are
present. For example, an individual who fits the description of Compulsive
Personality Disorder should be given that diagnosis even if some mild dependent
or paranoid features are present.


 330 Diagnostic Categories

     When an individual qualifies for two or more Personality Disorders, multi-
 ple diagnoses should be made.
    Atypical Personality Disorder should be used when the clinician judges that
a Personality Disorder is present but there is insufficient information to make a
more specific designation.
    Mixed Personality Disorder should be used when the individual has a
 Personality Disorder that involves features from several of the specific Personal-
 ity Disorders, but does not meet the criteria for any one Personality Disorder.
    Other Personality Disorder should be used when the clinician judges that
a specific Personality Disorder not included in this classification is appropriate,
such as Masochistic, Impulsive, or Immature Personality Disorder. In such
instances the clinician should record the specific Other Personality Disorder,
using the 301.89 code.


           V Codes For Conditions Not
                  Attributable To a Mental
         Disorder That Are A Focus of
                     Attention Or Treatment

The ICD-9-CM includes V Codes for a "Supplementary Classification of
Factors Influencing Health Status and Contact with Health Services." A brief
list of V Codes adapted from ICD-9-CM is provided here for conditions that
are a focus of attention or treatment but are not attributable to any of the mental
disorders noted previously. In some instances one of these conditions will be
noted because, after a thorough evaluation, no mental disorder is found. In other
instances the scope of the diagnostic evaluation has not been adequate to deter-
mine the presence or absence of a mental disorder but there is a need to note
the reason for contact with the mental health care system. (With further in-
formation, the presence of a mental disorder may become apparent.) Finally, an
individual may have a mental disorder, but the focus of attention or treatment
is on a condition that is not due to the mental disorder. For example, an indi-
vidual with Bipolar Disorder may have marital problems that are not directly
related to manifestations of the Affective Disorder but are the principal focus
of treatment.

V65.20 Malingering
The essential feature is the voluntary production and presentation of false
or grossly exaggerated physical or psychological symptoms. The symptoms are
produced in pursuit of a goal that is obviously recognizable with an understand-
ing of the individual's circumstances rather than of his or her individual psy-
chology. Examples of such obviously understandable goals include: to avoid
military conscription or duty, to avoid work, to obtain financial compensation,
to evade criminal prosecution, or to obtain drugs.
    Under some circumstances Malingering may represent adaptive behavior,
for example, feigning illness while a captive of the enemy during wartime.
    A high index of suspicion of Malingering should be aroused if any com-
bination of the following is noted:
     (1) medicolegal context of presentation, e.g., the person's being referred by
        his attorney to the physician for examination;
     (2) marked discrepancy between the person's claimed distress or disability
        and the objective findings;
     (3) lack of cooperation with the diagnostic evaluation and prescribed
        treatment regimen;
     (4) the presence of Antisocial Personality Disorder.
     The differentiation of Malingering from Factitious Disorder depends on
 the clinician's judgment as to whether the symptom production is in pursuit of
 a goal that is obviously recognizable and understandable in the circumstances.
 Individuals with Factitious Disorders have goals that are not recognizable in

                                331


332 Diagnostic Categories

light of their specific circumstances but are understandable only in light of their
psychology as determined by careful examination. Evidence of an intrapsychic
need to maintain the sick role suggests Factitious Disorder. Thus, the diagnosis
of Factitious Disorder excludes the diagnosis of the act of Malingering.
    Malingering is differentiated from Conversion and the other Somatoform
Disorders by the voluntary production of symptoms and by the obvious, recog-
nizable goal. The malingering individual is much less likely to present his or
her symptoms in the context of emotional conflict, and the symptoms presented
are less likely to be "symbolic" of an underlying emotional conflict. Symptom
relief in Malingering is not often obtained by suggestion, hypnosis, or intra-
venous barbiturates, as it frequently is in Conversion Disorder.

V62.89 Borderline Intellectual Functioning
This category can be used when a focus of attention or treatment is associated
with Borderline Intellectual Functioning, i.e., an IQ in the 71-84 range. The
differential diagnosis between Borderline Intellectual Functioning and Mental
Retardation (an IQ of 70 or below) is especially difficult and important when
certain mental disorders coexist. For example, when the diagnosis is of Schizo-
phrenic Disorder, Undifferentiated or Residual Type, and impairment in adap-
tive functioning is prominent, the existence of Borderline Intellectual Function-
ing is easily overlooked, and hence the level and quality of potential adaptive
functioning may be incorrectly assessed.

V71.01 Adult Antisocial Behavior
This category can be used when a focus of attention or treatment is adult
antisocial behavior that is apparently not due to a mental disorder, such as a
Conduct Disorder, Antisocial Personality Disorder, or a Disorder of Impulse
Control. Examples include the behavior of some professional thieves, racketeers,
or dealers in illegal substances.

V71.02 Childhood or Adolescent Antisocial Behavior
Same as above. Examples include isolated antisocial acts of children or adoles-
cents (not a pattern of antisocial behavior).

V62.30 Academic Problem
This category can be used when a focus of attention or treatment is an academic
problem that is apparently not due to a mental disorder. An example is a
pattern of failing grades or of significant underachievement in an individual
with adequate intellectual capacity, in the absence of a Specific Developmental
Disorder or any other mental disorder to account for the problem.

V62.20 Occupational Problem
This category can be used when a focus of attention or treatment is an occupa-
tional problem that is apparently not due to a mental disorder. Examples include
job dissatisfaction and uncertainty about career choices.


                                                       V Codes 333

V62.82 Uncomplicated Bereavement
This category can be used when a focus of attention or treatment is a normal
reaction to the death of a loved one (bereavement).
    A full depressive syndrome frequently is a normal reaction to such a loss,
with feelings of depression and such associated symptoms as poor appetite,
weight loss, and insomnia. However, morbid preoccupation with worthlessness,
prolonged and marked functional impairment, and marked psychomotor retarda-
tion are uncommon and suggest that the bereavement is complicated by the
development of a Major Depression.
    In Uncomplicated Bereavement, guilt, if present, is chiefly about things
done or not done at the time of the death by the survivor; thoughts of death
are usually limited to the individual's thinking that he or she would be better
off dead or that he or she should have died with the person who died. The
individual with Uncomplicated Bereavement generally regards the feeling of
depressed mood as "normal," although he or she may seek professional help for
relief of such associated symptoms as insomnia and anorexia.
    The reaction to the loss may not be immediate, but rarely occurs after the
first two or three months. The duration of "normal" bereavement varies con-
siderably among different subcultural groups.

V15.81 Noncompliance with Medical Treatment
This category can be used when a focus of attention or treatment is noncompli-
ance with medical treatment that is apparently not due to a mental disorder.
Examples include failure to follow a prescribed diet because of religious beliefs
or to take required medication because of a considered decision that the treat-
ment is worse than the illness. The major differential is with Personality Dis-
orders with prominent paranoid, passive-aggressive, or masochistic features.

V62.89 Phase of Life Problem or Other Life Circumstance Problem
This category can be used when a focus of attention or treatment is a problem
associated with a particular developmental phase or some other life circumstance
that is apparently not due to a mental disorder. Examples include problems
associated with going to school, separating from parental control, starting a new
career, marriage, divorce, and retirement.

V61.10 Marital Problem
This category can be used when a focus of attention or treatment is a marital
problem that is apparently not due to a mental disorder. An example is marital
conflict related to estrangement or divorce.

V61.20 Parent-Child Problem
This category can be used when a focus of attention or treatment is a parent-
 child problem that is apparently not due to a mental disorder of the individual
 (parent or child) who is being evaluated. An example is child abuse not attribu-
 table to a mental disorder of the parent.

V61.80 Other Specified Family Circumstances
 This category can be used when a focus of attention or treatment is a family


 334 Diagnostic Categories

circumstance that is apparently not due to a mental disorder and is not a
Parent-Child or a Marital Problem. Examples are interpersonal difficulties with
an aged in-law, or sibling rivalry.

V62.81 Other Interpersonal Problem
This category can be used when a focus of attention or treatment is an inter-
personal problem (other than marital or parent-child) that is apparently not due
to a mental disorder of the individual who is being evaluated. Examples are
difficulties with co-workers, or with romantic partners.


                              Additional Codes*


300.90 Unspecified Mental Disorder (nonpsychotic)
 This is a residual category to be used when enough information is available
 to rule out a psychotic disorder, but further specification is not possible. In
 some cases, with more information, the diagnosis can be changed to a specific
 disorder.

V71.09 No Diagnosis or Condition on Axis I
 This category should be used to indicate that following an examination, no
 Axis I diagnosis or condition (including the V code categories) is present. There
 may or may not be an Axis II diagnosis.

 799.90 Diagnosis or Condition Deferred on Axis I
 This category should be used to indicate that there is insufficient informa-
 tion to make any diagnostic judgment about an Axis I diagnosis or condition.

 V71.09 No Diagnosis on Axis II
This category should be used to indicate that, following an examination, no
Axis II diagnosis (i.e., no Personality Disorder or Specific Developmental Dis-
 order) is present. There may or may not be an Axis I diagnosis or condition.

 799.90 Diagnosis Deferred on Axis II
 This category should be used to indicate that there is insufficient informa-
 tion to make any diagnostic judgment about an Axis II diagnosis.

 * Although the terms distinguish between Axis I and Axis II, in order to maintain compatibility with
 ICD-9-CM, these Axis I and Axis II codes are the same.


                                335


This page intentionally left blank 


            Appendix A


        Decision Trees
For Differential Diagnosis


This page intentionally left blank 


                                                   Appendix A:
    Decision Trees For Differential
                                             Diagnosis*


The purpose of these decision trees is to aid the clinician in understanding
the organization and hierarchical structure of the classification. Each decision tree
starts with a set of clinical features. When one of these features is a prominent
part of the presenting clinical picture, the clinician can follow the series of
questions to rule in or out various diagnostic categories. The questions are only
approximations of the actual diagnostic criteria. The decision trees are not meant
to replace the specific diagnostic criteria.

                                                              Page
Psychotic features 340

Irrational anxiety and avoidance behavior 342

Mood disturbance (depressed, irritable or expansive) 344

Antisocial, aggressive, defiant, or oppositional behavior 345

Physical complaints and irrational anxiety about physical illness 346

Academic or learning difficulties 348

Organic Brain Syndromes 349

 Prepared by Robert L. Spitzer, M.D. and Janet B.W. Williams, M.S.W.


                               339


                     DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF PSYCHOTIC FEATURES

                          Delusions, hallucinations, incoherence, marked loosen-
                          ing of associations, poverty of content of thought,
                          markedly illogical thinking, behavior that is bizarre,
ORGANIC                   grossly disorganized or catatonic
DELUSIONAL
SYNDROME,               Yes    Known organic factor by history or medical
HALLUCINOSIS                   laboratory examination
or other organic
brain syndromes                                   | No
                                Symptoms under voluntary control         No
                                                  | Yes
                        Yes                                             No        FACTITIOUS
MALINGERING                    Goal obviously recognizable
                                                                                  DISORDER
                                                                         No
                                Duration less than two weeks 
                                                   Yes
BRIEF REACTIVE          Yes    Psychosis immediately following pro-     No        ATYPICAL
PSYCHOSIS                      foundly upsetting environmental event              PSYCHOSIS

                               The full depressive or manic syndrome is^
                        Yes    either not present, developed after any
                               psychotic symptoms, or was brief in dura-
                               tion relative to the duration of the psy-
                               chotic symptoms
                                                  TNC>
                               Differential between Schizophrenia and Af-
                               fective Disorder cannot be made, e.g., pre-        MAJOR
                                                                        N         AFFECTIVE
SCHIZOAFFECTIVE         Yes    occupation with a mood-incongruent de-             DISORDERS
DISORDER                       lusion or hallucination that dominates the
                               clinical picture when an affective syndrome        with psychotic
                               is not present                                     features


                               Certain psychotic symptoms, e.g., bizarre
                               delusions, specific forms of auditory hal- No
                               lucinations, marked loosening of associa-
                               tions, Incoherence and flat or inappropri-
                               ^ ate affect
                                                   Yes
                               Impaired routine dail1y functioning and on- No    ATYPICAL
                               set before age 45                                 PSYCHOSIS
                                                   Yes
                        Yes                                             No       SCHIZOPHRENI-
Cfl JI7OPI lUFMI A              Duration at least six months
                                                                                 FORM DISORDER

                               Presecutory delusions or delusions of jeal- No
                               Dusy clinically predominant
                                                   Yes
ATYPirAi                Yes    Prominent hallucinations,ioti§,  incoherence of No PARANOID
PSYCHOSIS                      marked loosening of associations                   DISORDERS

                              onset in childhood of grossly impaired emo- No     ATYPICAL
                              tional relationships and bizarre behaviour          PSYCHOSIS
                                                   Yes
                        Yes    Onset prior to 30 months of lack of re
INFANTILE                      sponsitene§s to others and gross impair-
AUTISM                         ment in language development
                                                    No
CHILDHOOD                     Onset of full syndrome involving sustained          ATYPICAL
ONSET Yesyes
nrnw A CM/r                    disturbance in emotional relationships and No      PERVASIVE
rLKVAalVL                      multiple bizarre behaviors after 30 months        DEVELOPMENTAL
DEVELOPMENTAL
mcrioncD                       and before age 12                                 DISORDER


   DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF IRRATIONAL ANXIETY AND AVOIDANCE BEHAVIOR


ORGANIC ( irrational anxiety or avoidance behavior* is the           pre- 

DISORDER (CE I dominant clinical feature
Organic Affective
Syndrome, Suhstanrp ^ Yes
                            ^ Known organic etiology 
Intoxication)
                                                   No
                        Yes r
See psychotic ^C              Psychotic features
decision tree                                      No
                                                                     ->v No
                            ^ Onset in childhood or adolescence
                                                   Yes

SEPARATION Yes                 Excessive anxiety concerning separation
AINAILIA MVlrTAYf ^^^^ ,.      from those to whom the individual is at-
DISORDER                       tached
                            V
AVOID ANT                                          No
DISORDER OF Yes             ^ Persistent shrinking from familiarity or con-
CHILDHOOD ^                    tact with strangers
OR ADOLESCENCE
                                                   No                             ATYPICAL
OVERANXIOUS ^ Yes                                                       No
                               Generalized and persistent anxiety or worry )  ^ ANXIETY
DISORDER ^                                                                        UlaUKUbK

                               Irrational avoidance of objects or situa-"^ No
                            v tions                                  J
                                                   Yes
                                                                     ~*\ No
                               Irrational avoidance of leaving the home
                                                   Yes


AGORAPHOBIA Yes                                                         M AGORAPHOBIA
WITH PANIC ^                ^ History of panic attacks ^              i NO ^^ WITIIOIIT
ATTACKS                                                                           PANIC ATTACKS

                              Irrational avoidance of social situations
SOCIAL ^ Yes                                                            No ^ SIMPLE
                              with overconcern about humiliation or em-
PHOBIA ^                                                                    ^ PHOBIA
                              barrassment
                            V J

PANIC ^ Yes
DISORDER ^                    Recurrent panic attacks ^
                                                   No
OBSESSIVE ^ Yes
COMPULSIVb ^                  Obsessions or compulsions
DISORDER
                                                   No
                              Generalized anxiety with motor tension,
GENERALIZED Yes               autonornic hyperactivity, apprehensive ex-
ANXIETY ^
                              pectation, vigilance or scanning, not reac-
DISORDER                      tive to a psychosocial stressor
                                                  No
                                                                        ... ATYPICAL
                              Maladaptive reaction to a psychosocial    No ^ ANYIFTY
                            ^ stressor                                            DISORDER
                                                  Yes
                                                                                  ADJUSTMENT
POST-TRAUMATIC Y
CTRFSS ^                      Repeated reexperiencing of traumatic      No ^ DISORDER
DISORDER                    ^ events                                        * WITH ANXIOUS
                                                                                  MOOD


            * Also consider Personality Disorders (Axis II), such as Avoidant, Borderline, Compulsive, and
            Schizotypal Personality Disorders.


  344 Appendix A

          DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF MOOD DISTURBANCE

               Depressed, irritable or expansive mood predominant
               clinical feature

 PRIMARY
 DEGENERATIVE

 DEMENTIA Yes
 WITH -^ ( Known organic etiology
 DEPRESSIVE
 FEATURES or
                                        No
 ORGANIC
 AFFECTIVE
              Yes
 SYNDROME        /^Psychotic features

 See psychotic                          No
 decision tree
                    Full depressive or manic syndrome sus-  No
                    tained for at least 2 weeks or any duration
                    if manic and hospitalized

                                        Yes

                    MAJOR AFFECTIVE DISORDERS

                                        No


              Yes f - -                                     No
 MAJOR                                                           . BIPOLAR
 DEPRESSION                                                       DISORDER

                    Duration of mood disturbance at least 2 ) No
                    years

                                        Yes

                  (OTHER SPECIFIC AFFECTIVE DISORDERS


 DYSTHYMIC Yes                                              CYCLOTHYM1C
 DISORDER"^ ^Disturbance all depressive
                                                         J-TT—^DISORDER

 ADJUSTMENT
 P'.PRDEI*, Yes r/vtaladaptive reaction to a psychosocial ^ No    ATYPICAL
 WIT. H            stressor                                       ArrECTIVE
 DEPRESSED                                                        DISORDER
MOOD


                                                      Decision Trees 345

       DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF ANTISOCIAL, AGGRESSIVE,
                DEFIANT, OR OPPOSITIONAL BEHAVIOR

           /^ Antisocial, aggressive, violent, defiant, or oppositional
ORGANIC I1    behavior predominant clinical feature
MENTAL
DISORDER*
(e.g., Substance Yes
Intoxication,^ f Known organic etiology
Organic
Personality                           No
Disorder)
             yES   Subaverage general Intellectual and adap-
MENTAL
                   tive functioningCT
RETARDATION
                                      No

sEE
    . ^      Yes Psychotiy c features, including bizarre be-
psychotic          ha vjor
decision tree
                                      No
INTERMITTENT
or yes             isolated discrete episode(s) of sudden loss
ISOLATED ""        of control of aggressive impulses resulting
EXPLOSIVE          in assault, violence or other destructive acts
DISORDER
                                      No

ANTISOCIAL         A personality pattern of continuous anti-
PERSONALITY  yES   social behavior in which the rights of others
DISORDER -<        are violated, with onset in childhood and
                   persistence into adult life

                                      No

                 '""A repetitive and persistent pattern of be-
CONDUCT      yES   havior in which either the rights of others
DISORDER           or major age-appropriate societal norms
                   or rules are violated

                                      No
OPPOSITIONAL
DISORDER ^Yes      A pattern of disobedient, negattvistic and
                   provocative opposition to authority figures

                                      No
ADJUSTMENT                                                    CHILDHOOD
DISORDER                                                  nO  OR
             Yes f Maladaptive reaction to a psychosocial     ADOLESCENT,
WITH               stressor
DISTURBANCE                                                   OR ADULT
OF CONDUCT                                                    ANTISOCIAL
                                                              BEHAVIOR

* Also consider Intermittent Explosive Disorder which can be diagnosed when symptomatic of an
Organic Mental Disorder.


                   DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF PHYSICAL COMPLAINTS
                   AND IRRATIONAL ANXIETY ABOUT PHYSICAL ILLNESS

                          pHYSICAL COMPLAINTS OR IRRATIONAL ANXIETY ABCUT PHYSI
                          eal illness predominant clinical feature


                               Demonstrable organic findings or typical No
                               pattern of illness of a physical disorder ac-
                               counts for symptoms

                                                   Yes

                               Specific or undiagnosed PHYSICAL CON-
                               DITION

PSYCHOLOGICAL
FACTORS
                        yES    Psychological factors Judged to be related No
AFFECTING                                                                         NO MENTAL
                               to initiation or exacerbation of physical          DISORDER
PHYSICAL                       condition
CONDITION

                               Symptoms apparently under voluntary con- \| No

                                                   Yes

                               Symptoms are for a goal that is obviously
                         yES                                            No        FACTITIOUS
MALINGERING                    recognizable given a knowledge of the en-
                                                                                  DISORDER
                               vironmental circumstances


See psychotic           yES
decision                       Psychotic features
tree
                                                   No
                        yES
See mood                       Symptomatic of a disturbance in mood 
decision tree
                                                   No

                              SQMATQFORM DISORDER


                               Recurrent and multiple somatic complaints "^
SOMATIZATION
                        yES   of several years' duration beginning before
DISORDER                       age 30 

                                                   No

                               Loss or alteration of functioning suggesting No
                              physical illness but attributed to "psy-
                               chological" factors

                                                   Yes
PSYCHOGENIC             yES                                             No        CONVERSION
                               Disturbance limited to pain
PAIN DISORDER                                                                     DISORDER

                               Unrealistic interpretation of physical signs
                                                                                  ATYPICAL
                        yES   or sensations as abnormal leading to pre- No
HYPO-                                                                       ->> SOMATOFORM
CHONDRIASIS                   occupation with the fear or belief of hav-
                               ing a serious disease                              DISORDER


348 Appendix A

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF ACADEMIC OR LEARNING DIFFICULTIES

                 Academic or learning difficulties major or predominant
                 disturbance

   NEUROLOGICAL
   DISORDER*^- Yes 
   (AXIS im ^ C Demonstrable signs of focal CNS disease

                                         No

                ^ Yes ^Sub-average general intellectual and
   MENTAL    ^n yjive functioning
   RETARDATION*
                                         No
                yES
r—SPECIFIC           Specific delay in development not symp-
                                   Qther disorder
   DEVELOPMENTAL     tomat'C °f
   DISORDER*
                                         No
   ATTENTION
                Yes f Developmentally inappropriate short atten-
I—DEFICIT
                     tion and poor concentration
   DISORDER*
                                         No

                     A repetitive and persistent pattern of be-
   CONDUCT^     yES  havior in which either the rights of others
   DISORDER*         or major age-appropriate societal norms or
                     rules are violated

                                         No
   OPPOSITIONAL*
                     A pattern of disobedient, negativistic and
I—DISORDER
                Yes I provocative opposition to authority figures

                                         No

                Yes  One or more of above disorders present
STOP                 and accounts for academic or learning
                     difficulty
Examples:                                                        Examples:
ADJUSTMENT                               No                      ACADEMIC
DISORDER WITH                                                No  PROBLEM,
                yES
WORK (OR             Symptomatic of another mental disorder      BORDERLINE
ACADEMIC)                                                        INTELLECTUAL
INHIBITION,                                                      FUNCTIONING
IDENTITY                                                        (V CODES)
DISORDER


* The arrows returning to the trunk of the tree indicate the possibility of multiple diagnoses.


                                                      Decision Trees 349

    DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF ORGANIC BRAIN SYNDROMES

              Evidence from either the history, physical examination,
              or laboratory tests, of a specific organic factor that is
              judged to be etiologically related to the disturbance*

DELIRIUM  (ALSO
                   Disturbance of attention, memory and
consider     yES
under-             orientation developing ©ver a short period
lying Dementia)   of time and fluctuating over time
                                       No
DEMENTIA
(also consider     Deterioration of previously acquired in-
super-       yES   tellectual abilities of sufficient severity to
imposed            interfere with social or occupational func-
Intoxication and  tioning
Withdrawal)                            No
             yES  Short- and long-term memory disturbance
AMNESTIC          is the predominant clinical feature 
SYNDROME
                                       No
             yES   Delusions are the predominant clinical
ORGANIC           feature
DELUSIONAL
SYNDROME                               No
             YeyESs Hallucinations are the predominant clinical
ORGANIC
                  FEATURE
HALLUCINOSIS
                                       No

ORGANIC      yES  Disturbance in mood closely resembling
AFFECTIVE          those in manic or major depressive epi-
SYNDROME           sodes
                                       No
                   Marked change in personality involving
             yES   either emotional lability, impaired impulse
ORGANIC <          control or social judgment, marked apathy
PERSONALITY        and indifference, or suspiciousness
SYNDROME
                                       No
             yES   Maladaptive behavior during the waking
                   state due to the recent ingestion and pres-
INTOXICATION       ence in the body of a substance
                                       No

                   Development of a substance-specific syn-     OTHER
             yES   drome that follows the cessation of or reduc- No OR MIXED
                   tion in intake of a substance that was pre-  ORGANIC
WITHDRAWAL        viously regularly used by the individual to   BRAIN
                   induce a state of intoxication               SYNDROME

* In the absence of such evidence, an organic factor can be presumed if conditions outside of the
Organic Mental Disorders category have been reasonably excluded and if the disturbance meets the
symptomatic criteria for Dementia.


This page intentionally left blank 


              Appendix B


Glossary of Technical Terms


This page intentionally left blank 


                                                    Appendix B:
          Glossary of Technical Terms


DSM-III, by and large, includes only those technical terms that are es-
sential for differential diagnosis; thus, many important terms relevant to psycho-
pathology are omitted. This glossary of technical terms is limited to those that
are used in either the descriptions and definitions or the diagnostic criteria of
DSM-III and that are associated with a number of mental disorders. For
example, bulimia is not in this glossary because it is rarely encountered except
among Eating Disorders, and the reader wishing to learn about this symptom
should refer to the text on those disorders. On the other hand, such symptoms
as delusions, phobias, obsessions, and depersonalization are included because
they all occur in a number of mental disorders.
    Many of the entries list the disorders in which the symptom most fre-
quently occurs; it should be understood, however, that the symptom may also
be present in other disorders.

AFFECT. An immediately expressed and observed emotion. A feeling state
becomes an affect when it is observable, for example, as overall demeanor or
tone and modulation of voice. Affect is to be distinguished from mood, which
refers to a pervasive and sustained emotion. Affect is to mood as weather is to
climate. Common examples of affect are euphoria, anger, and sadness.
    A range of affect may be described as broad (normal), restricted (con-
stricted), blunted, or flat. What is considered the normal range of the expression
of affect varies considerably, both within and among different cultures. The
normal expression of affect involves variability in facial expression, pitch of
voice, and the use of hand and body movements. Restricted affect is character-
ized by a clear reduction in the expressive range and intensity of affects. Blunted
affect is marked by a severe reduction in the intensity of affective expression.
In flat affect there is a lack of signs of affective expression; the voice may be
monotonous and the face, immobile.
    Affect is inappropriate when it is clearly discordant with the content of
the person's speech or ideation. Example: A patient smiled and laughed while
discussing demons who were persecuting him. An affect should not be termed
inappropriate, however, when it is inappropriate merely to the situation, such
as laughing when told that a relative has died; in such instances it would be more
apt to refer to inappropriate behavior.
    Affect is labile when it is characterized by repeated, rapid, and abrupt
shifts. Examples: An elderly man is tearful one moment and combative the next;
a young woman is observed by her friends to be friendly, gregarious, and happy
one moment and angry and abusive the next, without readily apparent reason.

                                353


354 Appendix B

AGITATION. See psychomotor agitation.

ANXIETY. Apprehension, tension, or uneasiness that stems from the anticipa-
tion of danger, which may be internal or external. Some definitions of anxiety
distinguish it from fear by limiting it to the anticipation of danger, the source
of which is largely unknown, whereas fear is the response to a consciously
recognized and usually external threat or danger. The manifestations of anxiety
and fear are the same and include motor tension, autonomic hyperactivity, ap-
prehensive expectation, and vigilance and scanning.
    Anxiety may be focused on an object, situation, or activity which is avoided
(phobia), or may be unfocused (free-floating anxiety). It may be experienced in
discrete periods of sudden onset and be accompanied by physical symptoms
(panic attacks). When anxiety is focused on physical signs or symptoms and
causes preoccupation with the fear or belief of having a disease, it is termed
hypochondriasis.

ATTENTION. The ability to focus in a sustained manner on one task or
activity. A disturbance in attention may be manifested by difficulty in finishing
tasks that have been started, easy distractibility, and/or difficulty in concen-
trating on work.

BLOCKING. Interruption of a train of speech before a thought or idea has been
completed. After a period of silence, which may last from a few seconds to
minutes, the person indicates that he or she cannot recall what he or she has
been saying or meant to say. Blocking should be judged to be present only
if the person spontaneously describes losing his or her thought or if upon ques-
tioning by the interviewer, the person gives that as the reason for pausing.

CATATONIC BEHAVIOR. Marked motor anomalies, generally limited to dis-
turbances in the context of a diagnosis of a non-organic psychotic disorder.

        Catatonic excitement. Excited motor activity, apparently purposeless
    and not influenced by external stimuli.

        Catatonic negativism. An apparently motiveless resistance to all in-
    structions or attempts to be moved. When passive, the person may resist
    any effort to be moved; when active, he or she may do the opposite of
    what is asked—for example, firmly clench jaws when asked to open mouth.

        Catatonic rigidity. Maintenance of a rigid posture against all efforts to
    be moved.

        Catatonic posturing. Voluntary assumption of an inappropriate or
    bizarre posture, usually held for a long period of time. Example: A patient
    may stand with arms outstretched as if he were Jesus on the cross.

        Catatonic stupor. Marked decrease in reactivity to environment and


                                     Glossary of Technical Terms 355

    reduction in spontaneous movements and activity, sometimes to the point of
    appearing to be unaware of one's surroundings.

        Catatonic waxy flexibility. The person's limbs can be "molded" into
    any position, which is then maintained. When the limb is being moved, it
    feels to the examiner as if it were made of pliable wax.

CIRCUMSTANTIALITY. A term used to describe speech that is indirect and
delayed in reaching the point because of unnecessary, tedious details, and
parenthetic remarks. Circumstantial replies or statements may be prolonged
for many minutes if the speaker is not interrupted and urged to get to the point.
Interviewers often respond to circumstantiality by interrupting the speaker
in order to complete the process of history taking within an allotted time. This
may make it difficult to distinguish loosening of associations from circumstan-
tiality. In the former there is a lack of connection between clauses, but in the
latter the clauses always retain a meaningful connection. In loosening of asso-
ciations the original point is lost, whereas in circumstantiality the speaker is
always aware of the original point, goal, or topic.
    Circumstantiality is common in Compulsive Personality Disorder and in
many people without mental disorder.

CLANGING. Speech in which sounds, rather than meaningful, conceptual rela-
tionships govern word choice; it may include rhyming and punning. The
term is usually applied only when it is a manifestation of a pathological condi-
tion; thus, it would not be used to describe the rhyming word play of children.
Example: "I'm not trying to make noise. I'm trying to make sense. If you can
make sense out of nonsense, well, have fun. I'm trying to make sense out of
sense. I'm not making sense (cents) anymore. I have to make dollars."
    Clanging is observed most commonly in Schizophrenia and manic episodes.

COMPULSION. Repetitive and seemingly purposeful behavior that is per-
formed according to certain rules or in a stereotyped fashion. The behavior is
not an end in itself, but is designed to produce or prevent some future state
of affairs; the activity, however, either is not connected in a realistic way
with the state of affairs it is designed to produce or prevent, or it may be
clearly excessive. The act is performed with a sense of subjective compulsion
coupled with a desire to resist it (at least initially); performing the particular
act is not pleasurable, although it may afford some relief of tension. Example: An
individual feels compelled to wash his or her hands, every time he or she shakes
hands because of a fear of contamination that he or she recognizes as excessive.
    Compulsions are characteristic of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder and may
also be seen in Schizophrenia.

CONFABULATION. Fabrication of facts or events in response to questions
about situations or events that are not recalled because of memory impairment.
It differs from lying in that the individual is not consciously attempting to
deceive.
    Confabulation is common in Organic Amnestic Syndrome.


356 Appendix B

CONVERSION SYMPTOM. A loss or alteration of physical functioning that
suggests a physical disorder but that is actually a direct expression of a psy-
chological conflict or need. The disturbance is not under voluntary control, and
is not explained by any physical disorder (this possibility having been ex-
cluded by appropriate investigation).
    Conversion symptoms are observed in Conversion Disorder, and may
occur in Schizophrenia.

DELUSION. A false personal belief based on incorrect inference about external
reality and firmly sustained in spite of what almost everyone else believes and
in spite of what constitutes incontrovertible and obvious proof or evidence to
the contrary. The belief is not one ordinarily accepted by other members of the
person's culture or subculture (i.e., it is not an article of religious faith).
    When a false belief involves an extreme value judgment, it is regarded as a
delusion only when the judgment is so extreme as to defy credibility. Example:
If someone claims he or she is terrible and has disappointed his or her family,
this is generally not regarded as a delusion even if an objective assess-
ment of the situation would lead observers to think otherwise; but if some-
one claims he or she is the worst sinner in the world, this would generally
be considered a delusional conviction. Similarly, a person judged by most people
to be moderately underweight who asserted he or she was fat would not be
regarded as delusional; but one with Anorexia Nervosa who at the point of
extreme emaciation insisted he or she was fat could rightly be considered
delusional.
    A delusion should be distinguished from a hallucination, which is a
false sensory perception (although a hallucination may give rise to the delusion
that the perception is true). A delusion is also to be distinguished from an
overvalued idea, in which an unreasonable belief or idea is not as firmly held
as is the case with a delusion.
    Delusions are subdivided according to their content. Some of the more
common types are listed below.

        Delusion of being controlled. A delusion in which feelings, impulses,
    thoughts, or actions are experienced as being not one's own, as being
    imposed by some external force. This does not include the mere con-
    viction that one is acting as an agent of God, has had a curse placed on
    him or her, is the victim of fate, or is not sufficiently assertive. The symp-
    tom should be judged present only when the subject experiences his or her
    will, thoughts, or feelings as operating under some external force. Examples:
    A man claimed that his words were not his own, but those of his father;
    a student believed that his actions were under the control of a yogi; a house-
    wife believed that sexual feelings were being put into her body from with-
    out.

        Delusion, bizarre. A false belief whose content is patently absurd and
    has no possible basis in fact. Example: A man believed that when his
    adenoids had been removed in childhood, a box had been inserted into his


                                  Glossary of Technical Terms 357

 head, and that wires had been placed in his head so that the voice he heard
 was that of the governor.

     Delusion, grandiose. A delusion whose content involves an exaggerated
 sense of one's importance, power, knowledge, or identity. It may have a
 religious, somatic, or other theme.

     Delusional jealousy. The delusion that one's sexual partner is un-
 faithful.

     Delusion, mood-congruent. See mood-congruent psychotic features.

     Delusion, mood-incongruent. See mood-incongruent psychotic features.

     Delusion, nihilistic. A delusion involving the theme of non-existence
 of the self or part of the self, others, or the world. Examples: "The world
 is finished"; "I no longer have a brain"; "There is no need to eat, because
 I have no insides." A somatic delusion may also be a nihilistic delusion if
 the emphasis is on nonexistence of the body or a part of the body.

     Delusion, persecutory. A delusion in which the central theme is that
 a person or group is being attacked, harassed, cheated, persecuted, or
 conspired against. Usually the subject or someone or some group or institu-
 tion close to him or her is singled out as the object of the persecution.
     It is recommended that the term "paranoid delusion" not be used,
 because its meanings are multiple, confusing, and contradictory. It has
 often been employed to refer to both persecutory and grandiose delusions
 because of their presence in the paranoid subtype of Schizophrenia.

     Delusion of poverty. A delusion that the person is, or will be, bereft
 of all, or virtually all, material possessions.

     Delusion of reference. A delusion whose theme is that events, objects,
 or other people in the person's immediate environment have a particular and
 unusual significance, usually of a negative or pejorative nature. This dif-
fers from an idea of reference, in which the false belief is not as firmly
 held as in a delusion. If the delusion of reference involves a persecutory
 theme, then a delusion of persecution is present as well. Examples: A
woman was convinced that programs on the radio were directed espe-
 cially to her; when recipes were broadcast, it was to tell her to prepare
 wholesome food for her child and stop feeding her candy; when dance
 music was broadcast, it was to tell her to stop what she was doing and
 start dancing, and perhaps even to resume ballet lessons. A patient notes
 that the room number of his therapist's office is the same as the number of
 the hospital room in which his father died and feels that this means there
 is a plot to kill him.


358 Appendix B

        Delusion, somatic. A delusion whose main content pertains to the
    functioning of one's body. Examples: One's brain is rotting; one is pregnant
    despite being postmenopausal.
        Extreme value judgments about the body may, under certain circum-
    stances, also be considered somatic delusions. Example: A person insists
    that his nose is grossly misshaped despite lack of confirmation of this
    by observers.
        Hypochondriacal delusions are also somatic delusions when they in-
    volve specific changes in the functioning or structure of the body rather
    than merely an insistent belief that one has a disease.

        Delusions, systematized. A single delusion with multiple elaborations
    or a group of delusions that are all related by the individual to a single
    event or theme. Example: A man who failed his bar examination developed
    the delusion that this occurred because of a conspiracy involving the uni-
    versity and the bar association. He then attributed all other difficulties in
    his social and occupational life to this continuing conspiracy.

DEPERSONALIZATION. An alteration in the perception or experience of the
self so that the feeling of one's own reality is temporarily lost. This is manifested
in a sense of self-estrangement or unreality, which may include the feeling that
one's extremities have changed in size, or a sense of seeming to perceive one-
self from a distance (usually from above).
    Depersonalization is seen in Depersonalization Disorder, and may also
occur in Schizotypal Personality Disorder^ and Schizophrenia. It also occurs in
the absence of any mental disorder in the presence of overwhelming anxiety,
stress or fatigue.

DIAGNOSIS. In general usage, and in DSM-III, this term refers to the process
of identifying specific mental or physical disorders. Some, however, use the term
more broadly to refer to a comprehensive evaluation that is not limited to the
identification of specific disorders. Thus in the limited sense of the term, only
Axes I, II and III are diagnostic, whereas in the broader sense, Axes IV and V
and other aspects of assessment can also be considered diagnostic.

DISORIENTATION. Confusion about the date or time of day, where one is
(place), or who one is (identity).
    Disorientation is characteristic of some Organic Mental Disorders, such as
Delirium and Dementia.

DISTRACTIBILITY. Attention drawn too frequently to unimportant or irrele-
vant external stimuli. Example: While being interviewed, a subject's attention is
repeatedly drawn to noise from an adjoining office, a book that is on a shelf,
or the interviewer's school ring.

ECHOLALIA. Repetition (echoing) of the words or phrases of others. Typical


                                      Glossary of Technical Terms 359

echolalia tends to be repetitive and persistent. The echo is often uttered with a
mocking, mumbling, or staccato intonation. Echolalia should not be confused
with habitual repetition of questions, apparently to clarify the question and
formulate its answer, as when a patient is asked, "When did you come to the
hospital?" and replies, "Come to the hospital? Yesterday."
    Example: An interviewer says to a subject, "I'd like to talk with you for a
few minutes"; and the subject responds, in a mumbling tone, "Talk with you
for a few minutes. Talk with you for a few minutes."
    Echolalia is observed in some Pervasive Developmental Disorders, Organic
Mental Disorders, and in Schizophrenia.

EGO-DYSTONIC. A symptom or personality trait that is recognized by the
individual as unacceptable and undesirable and is experienced as alien. Examples:
obsessions and compulsions; a homosexual arousal pattern that is unacceptable
to the individual would be ego-dystonic, whereas, if the individual were not
distressed by the pattern and experienced it as acceptable, it would be ego-
syntonic.

 FLIGHT OF IDEAS. A nearly continuous flow of accelerated speech with abrupt
 changes from topic to topic, usually based on understandable associations, dis-
 tracting stimuli, or plays on words. When severe, the speech may be disorga-
 nized and incoherent.
     Flight of ideas is most frequently seen in manic episodes, but may also
 be observed in some cases of Organic Mental Disorders, Schizophrenia, other
 psychotic disorders, and, occasionally, acute reactions to stress.

 FORMAL THOUGHT DISORDER. A disturbance in the form of thought as
 distinguished from the content of thought. The boundaries of the concept are
 not clear and there is no consensus as to which disturbances in speech or
 thought are included in the concept. For this reason, "formal thought disorder"
 is not used as a specific descriptive term in DSM-III. See loosening of associa-
 tions, incoherence, poverty of content of speech, neologisms, perseveration,
 blocking, echolalia, clanging.

 GRANDIOSITY. An inflated appraisal of one's worth, power, knowledge, im-
 portance, or identity. When extreme, grandiosity may be of delusional pro-
 portions. Example: A professor who frequently puts his students to sleep with
 his boring lectures is convinced that he is one of the more dynamic and exciting
 teachers at the university.

 HALLUCINATION. A sensory perception without external stimulation of the
 relevant sensory organ. A hallucination has the immediate sense of reality of a
 true perception, although in some instances the source of the hallucination may
 be perceived as within the body (e.g., an auditory hallucination may be experi-
 enced as coming from within the head rather than through the ears). (Some
 investigators limit the concept of true hallucinations to sensations whose source


360 Appendix B

is perceived as being external to the body, but the clinical significance of this
distinction has yet to be demonstrated, so it is not made in this manual.)
    There may or may not be a delusional interpretation of the hallucinatory
experience. For example, one person with auditory hallucinations may recognize
that he or she is having a false sensory experience whereas another may be con-
vinced that the source of the sensory experience has an independent physical
reality. Strictly speaking, hallucinations indicate a psychotic disturbance only
when they are associated with gross impairment in reality testing (see psychot-
ic). The term hallucination, by itself, is not ordinarily applied to the false per-
ceptions that occur during dreaming, while falling asleep (hypnagogic), or when
awakening (hypnopompic). Hallucinations occurring in the course of an intensely
shared religious experience generally have no pathological significance.
    Hallucinations should be distinguished from illusions, in which an external
stimulus is misperceived or misinterpreted, and from normal thought processes
that are exceptionally vivid. Transient hallucinatory experiences are common
in individuals without mental disorder.

        Hallucination, auditory. A hallucination of sound, most commonly of
    voices, but sometimes of clicks, rushing noises, music, etc.

        Hallucination, gustatory. A hallucination of taste, unpleasant tastes
    being the most common.

        Hallucination, mood-congruent. See mood-congruent psychotic fea-
    tures.

        Hallucination, mood-incongruent. See mood-incongruent psychotic fea-
    tures.

        Hallucination, olfactory. A hallucination involving smell. Example: A
    woman complained of a persistent smell of dead bodies. Some individuals
    are convinced they have a body odor they themselves cannot smell; this
    symptom is a delusion, not an olfactory hallucination.

        Hallucination, somatic. A hallucination involving the perception of a
    physical experience localized within the body. Example: A feeling of elec-
    tricity running through one's body.
        Somatic hallucinations are to be distinguished from unexplained physi-
    cal sensations; a somatic hallucination can be identified with certainty only
    when a delusional interpretation of a physical illness is present. A somatic
    hallucination is to be distinguished also from hypochondriacal preoccupa-
    tion with, or exaggeration of, normal physical sensations and from a tac-
    tile hallucination, in which the sensation is usually related to the skin.

        Hallucination, tactile. A hallucination involving the sense of touch,
    often of something on or under the skin. Almost invariably the symptom
    is associated with a delusional interpretation of the sensation. Examples:


                                      Glossary of Technical Terms 361

    A man said he could feel the Devil putting pins into his flesh; another
    claimed he could feel himself being penetrated anally; still another com-
    plained of experiencing pains, which he attributed to the Devil, throughout
    his body, although there was no evidence of any physical illness.
        A particular tactile hallucination is formication, which is the sensation
    of something creeping or crawling on or under the skin. Often there is a
    delusional interpretation of the sensation, as when it is attributed to insects
    or worms. Formication is seen in Alcohol Withdrawal Delirium and the
    withdrawal phase of Cocaine Intoxication.
        Tactile hallucinations of pain are to be distinguished from Psycho-
    genie Pain Disorder, in which there is no delusional interpretation.

        Hallucination, visual. A hallucination involving sight, which may con-
    sist of formed images, such as of people, or of unformed images, such as
    flashes of light. Visual hallucinations should be distinguished from illusions,
    which are misperceptions of real external stimuli.

HYPOCHONDRIASIS. Unrealistic interpretation of physical signs or sensations
as abnormal, leading to preoccupation with the fear or belief of having a disease.

IDEA OF REFERENCE. An idea, held less firmly than a delusion, that events,
objects, or other people in the person's immediate environment have a particular
and unusual meaning specifically for him or her. See also delusion of reference.

IDENTITY. The sense of self, providing a unity of personality over time.
Prominent disturbances in identity or the sense of self are seen in Schizophrenia,
Borderline Personality Disorder, and Identity Disorder.

ILLOGICAL THINKING. Thinking that contains clear internal contradictions
or in which conclusions are reached that are clearly erroneous, given the initial
premises. It may be seen in individuals without mental disorder, particularly in
situations in which they are distracted or fatigued. Illogical thinking has psycho-
pathological significance only when it is marked, as in the examples noted
below, and when it is not due to cultural or religious values or to intellectual
deficit. Markedly illogical thinking may lead to, or result from, a delusional
belief or may be observed in the absence of a delusion.
    Examples: A patient explained that she gave her family IBM cards, which
 she punched, in an effort to improve communication with them. Another patient
 stated: "Parents are the people that raise you. Parents can be anything—mate-
 rial, vegetable, or mineral—that has taught you something. A person can look
 at a rock and learn something from it, so a rock is a parent." In response to
 the question "Why did you go to Kingston?" a patient replied, "Because I
 believe in the King James Bible and my name is James. I went to Kingston to
 see the Queen."

 ILLUSION. A misperception of a real external stimulus. Examples: The rustling
 of leaves is heard as the sound of voices; a man claims that when he looks in
 a mirror, he sees his face distorted and misshapen. See also hallucination.


362 Appendix B

INCOHERENCE. Speech that, for the most part, is not understandable, owing
to any of the following: a lack of logical or meaningful connection between
words, phrases, or sentences; excessive use of incomplete sentences; excessive
irrelevancies or abrupt changes in subject matter; idiosyncratic word usage; dis-
torted grammar. Mildly ungrammatical constructions or idiomatic usages char-
acteristic of particular regional or ethnic backgrounds, lack of education, or low
intelligence should not be considered incoherence; and the term is generally not
applied when there is evidence that the disturbance in speech is due to an
aphasia.
    Example: Interviewer: "Why do you think people believe in God?" Sub-
ject: "Um, because making a do in life. Isn't none of that stuff about evolution
guiding isn't true anymore now. It all happened a long time ago. It happened
in eons and eons and stuff they wouldn't believe in Him. The time that Jesus
Christ people believe in their thing people believed in, Jehovah God that they
didn't believe in Jesus Christ that much."
    Incoherence may be seen in some Organic Mental Disorders, Schizophrenia,
and other psychotic disorders.

INSOMNIA. Difficulty falling or staying asleep. Initial insomnia is difficulty in
falling asleep. Middle insomnia involves an awakening, followed by difficulty
returning to sleep, but eventually doing so. Terminal insomnia is awakening
at least two hours before one's usual waking time and being unable to return
to sleep.

LOOSENING OF ASSOCIATIONS. Thinking characterized by speech in which
ideas shift from one subject to another that is completely unrelated or only
obliquely related without the speaker's showing any awareness that the topics
are unconnected. Statements that lack a meaningful relationship may be juxta-
posed, or the individual may shift idiosyncratically from one frame of reference
to another: When loosening of associations is severe, speech may be incoherent.
The term is generally not applied when abrupt shifts in topics are associated
 with a nearly continuous flow of accelerated speech (as in flight of ideas).
    Example: Interviewer: "What did you think of the whole Watergate
affair?" Subject: "You know I didn't tune in on that, I felt so bad about it. I
 said, Boy, I'm not going to know what's going on in this. But it seemed to
get so murky, and everybody's reports were so negative. Huh, I thought, I
 don't want any part of this, and I don't care who was in on it, and all I could
figure out was Artie had something to do with it. Artie was trying to flush the
bathroom toilet of the White House or something. She was trying to do some-
thing fairly simple. The tour guests stuck or something. She got blamed because
the water overflowed, went down in the basement, down, to the kitchen. They
had a, they were going to have to repaint and restore the White House room,
the enormous living room. And then it was at this reunion they were having.
 And it's just such a mess and I just thought, well, I'm just going to pretend like
I don't even know what's going on. So I came downstairs and 'cause I pre-
tended like I didn't know what was going on, I slipped on the floor of the


                                      Glossary of Technical Terms 363

kitchen, cracking my toe, when I was teaching some kids how to do some double
dives."
    Loosening of associations may be seen in Schizophrenia, manic episodes,
and other psychotic disorders.

MAGICAL THINKING. The individual believes that his or her thoughts, words,
or actions might, or will in some manner cause or prevent a specific outcome in
some way that defies the normal laws of cause and effect. Example: A man
believed that if he said a specific prayer three times each night, his mother's
death might be prevented indefinitely; a mother believed that if she had an angry
thought her child would become ill.
    Magical thinking may be part of ideas of reference or may reach delusional
proportions when the individual maintains a firm conviction about the belief
despite evidence to the contrary.
    Magical thinking is seen in children, in people in primitive cultures, and
in Schizotypal Personality Disorder, Schizophrenia, and Obsessive Compulsive
Disorder.

MENTAL DISORDER. In DSM-III, a mental disorder is conceptualized as a
clinically significant behavioral or psychologic syndrome or pattern that occurs
in an individual and that typically is associated with either a painful symptom
(distress) or impairment in one or more important areas of functioning (dis-
ability). In addition, there is an inference that there is a behavioral, psychologic,
or biologic dysfunction, and that the disturbance is not only in the relation-
ship between the individual and society. When the disturbance is limited to a
conflict between an individual and society, this may represent social deviance,
which may or may not be commendable, but is not by itself a mental disorder.

MOOD. A pervasive and sustained emotion that in the extreme, markedly
colors the person's perception of the world. Mood is to affect as climate is to
weather. Common examples of mood include depression, elation, anger, and
anxiety.

        Mood, dysphoric. An unpleasant mood, such as depression, anxiety, or
    irritability.

        Mood, elevated. A mood that is more cheerful than normal; it does not
    necessarily imply pathology.

        Mood, euphoric. An exaggerated feeling of well-being. As a technical
    term, euphoria implies a pathological mood. Whereas the individual with a
    normally elevated mood may describe himself or herself as being in "good
    spirits," "very happy," or "cheerful," the euphoric person is likely to
    exclaim that he or she is "on top of the world," "up in the clouds," or to
    say, "I feel ecstatic," "I'm flying," or "I am high."

        Mood, euthymic. Mood in the "normal" range, which implies the ab-
    sence of depressed or elevated mood.


364 Appendix B

        Mood, expansive. Lack of restraint in expressing one's feelings, fre-
    quently with an overvaluation of one's significance or importance. There
    may also be elevated or euphoric mood.

        Mood, irritable. Internalized feeling of tension associated with being
    easily annoyed and provoked to anger.

MOOD-CONGRUENT PSYCHOTIC FEATURES. Delusions or hallucinations
whose content is entirely consistent with either a depressed or a manic mood.
If the mood is depressed, the content of the delusions or hallucinations would
involve themes of either personal inadequacy, guilt, disease, death, nihilism, or
deserved punishment. If the mood is manic, the content of the delusions or hallu-
cinations would involve themes of inflated worth, power, knowledge, or identity,
or special relationship to a deity or a famous person.

MOOD-INCONGRUENT PSYCHOTIC FEATURES. Delusions or hallucina-
tions whose content is not consistent with either a depressed or a manic mood.
In the case of depression, a delusion or hallucination whose content does not
involve themes of either personal inadequacy, guilt, disease, death, nihilism, or
deserved punishment. In the case of mania, a delusion or hallucination whose
content does not involve themes of either inflated worth, power, knowledge, or
identity or special relationship with a deity or a famous person. Examples of
such symptoms are persecutory delusions, thought insertion, thought broad-
casting, and delusions of being controlled, whose content has no apparent rela-
tionship to any of the themes noted above. (Note: The catatonic symptoms of
stupor, mutism, negativism, and posturing in manic episodes are also considered
mood-incongruent psychotic features.)

NEOLOGISMS. New words invented by the subject, distortions of words, or
standard words to which the subject has given new, highly idiosyncratic mean-
ing. The judgment that neologisms are present should be made cautiously, taking
into account the subject's educational and cultural background. Examples: "I
was accused of midigation" (meaning the subject was accused of breaking the
law). "They had an insinuating machine next door" (person explaining how
her neighbors were bothering her).
    Neologisms may be observed in Schizophrenia and other psychotic dis-
orders.

NEUROTIC DISORDER. A mental disorder in which the predominant dis-
turbance is a symptom or group of symptoms that is distressing to the indi-
vidual and is recognized by him or her as unacceptable and alien (ego-dystonic);
reality testing is grossly intact. Behavior does not actively violate gross social
norms (though it may be quite disabling). The disturbance is relatively endur-
ing or recurrent without treatment, and is not limited to a transitory reaction
to stressors. There is no demonstrable organic etiology or factor.

NEUROTIC PROCESS. A specific etiological process involving the following


                                      Glossary of Technical Terms 365

sequence: (1) unconscious conflicts between opposing desires or between de-
sires and prohibitions, which cause (2) unconscious perception of anticipated
danger or dysphoria, which leads to (3) use of defense mechanisms that result
in (4) either symptoms, personality disturbance, or both.

OBSESSIONS. Recurrent, persistent ideas, thoughts, images, or impulses that
are ego-dystonic, that is, they are not experienced as voluntarily produced, but
rather as ideas that invade consciousness.
    Obsessions are characteristic of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder and may
also be seen in Schizophrenia.

ORIENTATION. Awareness of where one is in relation to time, place, and
person.

OVERVALUED IDEA. An unreasonable and sustained belief or idea that is
maintained with less than delusional intensity. It differs from an obsessional
thought in that the person holding the overvalued idea does not recognize
its absurdity and thus does not struggle against it. As with a delusion, the idea
or belief is not one that is ordinarily accepted by other members of the person's
culture or subculture.
    Example: A patient with a long-standing hand-washing compulsion thought
there might be danger in shaking hands with people, because they might have
recently been inoculated against smallpox and be infectious. Although she
acknowledged that the danger might not be real, she could not accept reassur-
ances that there was medically no danger.

PANIC ATTACKS. Discrete periods of sudden onset of intense apprehension,
fearfulness, or terror, often associated with feelings of impending doom. During
the attacks there are such symptoms as dyspnea, palpitations, chest pain or dis-
comfort, choking or smothering sensations, and fear of going crazy or losing
control.
    Panic attacks are characteristic of Panic Disorder, but may also occur in
Somatization Disorder, Major Depression and Schizophrenia.

PARANOID IDEATION. Ideation, of less than delusional proportions, involving
suspiciousness or the belief that one is being harassed, persecuted, or unfairly
treated. In some instances the term is used when the clinician is unsure of
whether the disturbances are actually delusional. Ideas of reference often involve
paranoid ideation.

PERSEVERATION. Persistent repetition of words, ideas, or subjects so that,
once an individual begins speaking about a particular subject or uses a particular
word, it continually recurs. Perseveration differs from the repetitive use of
"stock words" or interjections such as "you know" or "like."
    Examples: "I think I'll put on my hat, my hat, my hat, my hat." Inter-
viewer: "Tell me what you are like, what kind of person you are." Subject:


366 Appendix B

"I'm from Marshalltown, Iowa. That's 60 miles northwest, northeast of Des
Moines, Iowa. And I'm married at the present time. I'm 36 years old. My wife
is 35. She lives in Garwin, Iowa. That's 15 miles southeast of Marshalltown,
Iowa. I'm getting a divorce at the present time. And I am at present in a mental
institution in Iowa City, Iowa, which is 100 miles southeast of Marshalltown,
Iowa."
    Perseveration is most commonly seen in Organic Mental Disorders, Schizo-
phrenia, and other psychotic disorders.

PERSONALITY. Deeply ingrained patterns of behavior, which include the way
one relates to, perceives, and thinks about the environment and oneself. Per-
sonality traits are prominent aspects of personality, and do not imply pathology.
Personality disorder implies inflexible and maladaptive patterns of sufficient
severity to cause either significant impairment in adaptive functioning or sub-
jective distress.

PHOBIA. A persistent, irrational fear of a specific object, activity, or situation
that results in a compelling desire to avoid the dreaded object, activity, or situa-
tion (the phobic stimulus). More commonly, the individual does actually avoid
the feared situation or object, though he or she recognizes that the fear is un-
reasonable and unwarranted by the actual dangerousness of the object, activity,
or situation. Some individuals with a phobia claim that their avoidance is rational
because they anticipate overwhelming anxiety or some other strong emotion
that is out of their control; they do not claim, however, that their anxiety is
rationally justified.

POVERTY OF CONTENT OF SPEECH. Speech that is adequate in amount but
conveys little information because of vagueness, empty repetitions, or use of
stereotyped or obscure phrases. The interviewer may observe that the individual
has spoken at some length but has not given adequate information to answer a
question. Alternatively, the individual may provide enough information to
answer the question, but require many words to do so, so that his or her lengthy
reply can be summarized in a sentence or two. The term poverty of content of
speech is generally not used when the speech is, for the most part, not under-
standable (incoherence).
    Example: Interviewer: "OK. Why is it, do you think, that people believe in
God?" Patient: "Well, first of all because, He is the person that, is their personal
savior. He walks with me and talks with me. And uh, the understanding that
I have, a lot of peoples, they don't really know their own personal self. Because
they ain't, they all, just don't know their own personal self. They don't, know
that He uh, seemed like to me, a lot of em don't understand that He walks and
talks with them. And uh, show 'em their way to go. I understand also that,
every man and every lady, is just not pointed in the same direction. Some are
pointed different. They go in their different ways. The way that Jesus Christ
wanted 'em to go. Myself, I am pointed in the ways of uh, knowing right from
wrong, and doing it. I can't do any more, or not less, than that."


                                      Glossary of Technical Terms 367

POVERTY OF SPEECH. Restriction in the amount of speech, so that spontaneous
speech and replies to questions are brief and unelaborated. When the condition
is marked, replies may be monosyllabic, and some questions may be unanswered.
    Poverty of speech occurs frequently in Schizophrenia, major depressive epi-
sodes, and Organic Mental Disorders, such as Dementia.

PRESSURE OF SPEECH. Speech that is increased in amount, accelerated, and
difficult or impossible to interrupt. Usually it is also loud and emphatic. Fre-
quently, the individual talks without any social stimulation and may continue to
talk even though no one is listening.
    Pressure of speech is most often seen in manic episodes, but may also occur
in some cases of Organic Mental Disorders, Major Depression with psychomotor
agitation, Schizophrenia, other psychotic disorders, and, occasionally, acute reac-
tions to stress.

PRODROMAL. Early signs or symptoms of a disorder.

PSEUDODEMENTIA. Clinical features resembling a Dementia that are not
due to organic brain dysfunction or disease. Pseudodementia may occur in a
major depressive episode or may be seen in Factitious Disorder with Psycho-
logical Symptoms.

PSYCHOMOTOR AGITATION. Excessive motor activity associated with a feel-
ing of inner tension; the activity is usually nonproductive and repetitious.
When the agitation is severe, it may be accompanied by shouting or loud
complaining. The term should be used in a technical sense to refer only to
states of tension or restlessness that are accompanied by observable excessive
motor activity. Examples: Inability to sit still, pacing, wringing of hands, pulling
at clothes.

PSYCHOMOTOR RETARDATION. Visible generalized slowing down of physi-
cal reactions, movements, and speech.

PSYCHOTIC. A term indicating gross impairment in reality testing. It may be
used to describe the behavior of an individual at a given time, or a mental dis-
order in which at some time during its course all individuals with the disorder
have grossly impaired reality testing. When there is gross impairment in reality
 testing, the individual incorrectly evaluates the accuracy of his or her percep-
 tions and thoughts and makes incorrect inferences about external reality, even in
 the face of contrary evidence. The term psychotic does not apply to minor dis-
 tortions of reality that involve matters of relative judgment. For example, a
 depressed person who underestimated his achievements would not be described
 as psychotic, whereas one who believed he had caused a natural catastrophe
 would be so described.
    Direct evidence of psychotic behavior is the presence of either delusions or
 hallucinations without insight into their pathological nature. The term psychotic
 is sometimes appropriate when an individual's behavior is so grossly disorga-


368 Appendix B

nized that a reasonable inference can be made that reality testing is disturbed.
Examples include markedly incoherent speech without apparent awareness by
the person that the speech is not understandable, and the agitated, inattentive,
and disoriented behavior seen in Alcohol Withdrawal Delirium.
    In DSM-II the term psychotic was applied to individuals whose "mental
functioning [was] sufficiently impaired to interfere grossly with their capacity
to meet the ordinary demands of life," whether or not there was impaired reality
testing. This definition of psychotic did not conform to common usage, which
generally limited use of the term to impairment in reality testing, as does the
DSM-III definition. As a result, the value of the term for communication was
diminished, since it was then unclear whether or not an individual described as
being psychotic had gross impairment in reality testing. It should also be noted
that an individual with a nonpsychotic mental disorder may exhibit psychotic
behavior, though rarely. For example, an individual with Obsessive Compulsive
Disorder may at times come to believe in the reality of the danger of being
contaminated by shaking hands with strangers.
    In DSM-III the psychotic disorders include Pervasive Developmental Dis-
orders, Schizophrenic and Paranoid Disorders, Psychotic Disorders Not Else-
where Classified, some Organic Mental Disorders, and some Affective Dis-
orders.

RESIDUAL. The phase of an illness that occurs after remission of the florid
symptoms or the full syndrome. Examples: The residual states of Infantile
Autism, Attention Deficit Disorder, and Schizophrenia.

SIGN. An objective manifestation of a pathological condition. Signs are ob-
served by the examiner rather than reported by the individual.

SYMPTOM. A manifestation of a pathological condition. Although in some
uses of the term it is limited to subjective complaints, in common use "symp-
tom" includes objective signs of pathological conditions as well.

SYNDROME. A grouping of symptoms that occur together and that constitute a
recognizable condition. The term "syndrome" is less specific than "disorder" or
"disease." The term "disease" generally implies a specific etiology or patho-
physiological process. In DSM-III most of the disorders are, in fact, syndromes.


               Appendix C


Annotated Comparative Listing
    of DSM-II and DSM-III*


This page intentionally left blank 


                                                   AppendixC:
    Annotated Comparative Listing
                 of DSM-II and DSM-III*


This section lists all of the specific categories included in the previous manual
(DSM-II) and the specific DSM-III categories that are equivalent to or subsumed
by them. Because of the greater precision with which the DSM-III categories are
described and because the diagnostic concepts have often been modified, the
degree of equivalence varies. (For example, in DSM-III the category of Schizo-
phrenia is more restrictive than the DSM-II category.) Whenever a category
in one manual corresponds to several categories in the other, the latter categories
are enclosed by one brace. In some instances, several categories from one manual
are equivalent to several categories from the other manual. In such cases, a
double brace is used.

This text should not be used as a conversion between DSM-II and ICD-9-CM.
In a number of instances, the conceptual reclassification of disorders is unique
to DSM-III and does not conform to the classification of these disorders in ICD-
9-CM. When these departures occur, the DSM-III titles have been asterisked.

When a DSM-II category is listed without a corresponding DSM-III category, it
indicates that the DSM-II category was not included in DSM-III. Likewise, when
a DSM-III category is listed with no corresponding DSM-II category, it indicates
that the DSM-III diagnostic concept was not included in DSM-II.

Included in the table are comments that attempt to explain the reasons for major
changes in the DSM-II classification, terminology, or definitions of the categories.
References are cited when the reason for a change is based on evidence cited in
the literature or when the article referred to provides a fuller discussion of the
rationale for the change.

The DSM-II classification follows, in order to assist the reader in locating specific
categories, since the diagnostic categories are listed in the order in which they
appear in DSM-II.

* Prepared by Robert L. Spitzer, M.D., Steven E. Hyler, M.D., and Janet B.W. Williams,
M.S.W.

DSM-II DSM-III
I Mental Retardation Mental Retardation
Since the large majority of persons with borderline intellectual functioning (IQ=71-84)
do not have significant impairment in adaptive behavior, this range of intellectual func-
tioning is no longer included within Mental Retardation (1). DSM-III includes Border-
line Intellectual Functioning as a V code for Conditions Not Attributable to a Mental

                                371


372 Appendix C

DSM-II DSM-III
Disorder because of the frequent need to attend to this condition when planning
treatment (2).
310.x Borderline mental retardation V62.89 Borderline intellectual func-
                                                         tioning (included as a Con-
                                                         dition not attributable to a
                                                         mental disorder)
311.x Mild mental retardation 317.00 Mild mental retardation
312.x Moderate mental retardation 318.00 Moderate mental retardation
313.x Severe mental retardation 318.10 Severe mental retardation
314.x Profound mental retardation 318.20 Profound mental retardation
315.x Unspecified mental retardation 319.00 Unspecified mental retardation
In DSM-II the fourth digit was used to note associated physical conditions. In DSM-III,
the multiaxial system permits a more specific designation of associated physical condi-
tions, noted on Axis III.

II Organic Brain Syndromes Organic Mental Disorders
The introduction to the Organic Brain Syndromes section of DSM-II implied the con-
cept of a single organic brain syndrome with a limited number of manifestations. They
were divided into the Psychoses and the Non-psychotic Organic Brain Syndromes. Be-
cause psychosis was defined in terms of "severity of functional impairment" and the
"capacity to meet the ordinary demands of life," the psychotic-nonpsychotic distinc-
tion was difficult to make. Within the psychotic Organic Brain Syndromes, DSM-II
retained the DSM-I distinction of acute vs. chronic brain syndrome. This distinction
was based on the potential reversibility of the syndrome and not on course of the ill-
ness, as the terms "acute" and "chronic" are ordinarily used. This approach had many
limitations; for example, it discouraged recognition of the possible reversibility of
seemingly "chronic" brain syndromes, such as "reversible dementia" (3, 4, 5).
The DSM-III approach recognizes nine different organic brain syndromes: intoxication,
withdrawal, delirium, dementia, amnestic syndrome, delusional syndrome, hallucinosis,
affective syndrome, and personality syndrome. When the etiological factor is either
associated with aging or is substance-induced, the etiological factor together with the
specific organic brain syndrome constitutes the DSM-III Organic Mental Disorder.
When there is some other etiology (e.g., pneumonia) or the etiology or pathophysio-
logical process is unknown, the organic brain syndrome from Section 2 of the Organic
Mental Disorders section of DSM-III is noted on Axis I and the specific physical dis-
order, if known, is noted on Axis III.
In DSM-II the category of "Drug Intoxication (other than alcohol)" did not allow for
identifying the class of drug, or the more specific brain syndrome.
The DSM-II categories that have equivalent specific DSM-III categories are presented
below.
The large number of specific DSM-III Organic Mental Disorders that have no direct
DSM-II equivalents are not listed in this table.
290 Senile and presenile dementia 290.xx Dementias arising in the senium
                                                         and presenium
290.0 Senile dementia 290.xx Primary degenerative dementia,
                                                         senile onset
290.1 Presenile dementia 290.1 x Primary degenerative dementia,
                                                         presenile onset

Fourth and fifth digits in DSM-III are used to code complications of delirium, delu-
sional features or depressive features.


                                Comparative Listing of DSM-II and DSM-III 373
 DSM-II                                        DSM-III
 291 Alcoholic psychosis
 291.0 Delirium tremens 291.00                         Alcohol withdrawal delirium
 291.1 Korsakov's psychosis, alcoholic 291.10          Alcohol amnestic disorder
 291.2 Other alcoholic hallucinosis 291.30             Alcohol hallucinosis
 291.3 Alcohol paranoid state 303.9x                   Alcohol Dependence* and a
                                                          Paranoid Disorder*
 Because there is no compelling evidence that a paranoid state due to chronic alcohol
 use is a distinct entity, DSM-III does not include a category for alcohol paranoid state.
 291.4  Acute alcohol intoxication            303.00   Alcohol intoxication*
 291.5  Alcoholic deterioration               291.2x   Dementia associated with alco-
                                                          holism
 There is no compelling evidence that alcohol itself is the causative factor in Dementia
 in individuals with chronic Alcohol Dependence. For this reason, the ICD-9 term
 "Alcohol Dementia" is avoided since it implies that alcohol is known to be the caus-
 ative factor (6).

 291.6 Pathological intoxication 291.40                Alcohol idiosyncratic intoxica-
                                                          tion
 The DSM-III term is more precise than the DSM-II term.
 293.0 Psychosis with cerebral
          arteriosclerosis                    290.4x Multi-infarct dementia
 There is evidence that the dementia is related to the presence of multiple infarcts
 rather than the degree of cerebral arteriosclerosis (7, 8).

 294.4 Psychosis with childbirth              298.90 Atypical psychosis
 As with DSM-II, the DSM-III category is to be used only when no other psychotic dis-
 order can be diagnosed. There is no compelling evidence that post-partum psychosis is
 a distinct entity.

 II B. Non-psychotic Organic Brain Syndromes
 309.13  Non-psychotic organic brain syn-
              drome with alcohol (simple
              drunkenness) 303.00                      Alcohol intoxication*
 309.30  Non-psychotic organic brain syn-
              drome with circulatory dis-
              turbance 290.4x                          Multi-infarct dementia*
309.60   Non-psychotic organic brain syn-
              drome with senile or presenile  290.xx   Primary degenerative dementia,
              brain disease                               senile onset
                                              290.1 x  Primary degenerative dementia,
                                                          presenile onset

III B. Psychoses Not Attributed to Physical
        Conditions Listed Previously
 DSM-III does not use "psychotic" as a fundamental basis for classifying the non-
 organic mental disorders in order to avoid classifying the Major Affective Disorders as
 psychotic, since such disorders usually do not have psychotic features.
Schizophrenia Schizophrenic Disorders
The DSM-III concept is more restrictive in order to identify a group that is more
homogeneous in regard to differential response to somatic therapy, presence of a
familial pattern, a tendency toward onset in early adult life, recurrence, and severe
functional impairment (9, 10).


374 Appendix C

DSM-ll DSM-III
In DSM-ll, two of the subtypes were defined by course, and the remaining subtypes
were defined only by symptomatology. In DSM-III, the fourth digit is used to charac-
terize symptomatology of the current episode, and the fifth digit is used to code the
course of the illness as subchronic, chronic, subchronic with acute exacerbation,
chronic with acute exacerbation, or in remission.
295.0 Schizophrenia, simple type 301.22                Schizotypal personality dis-
                                                         order*
The DSM-III concept of Schizophrenia requires the presence of psychotic features at
some time during the illness. Furthermore, the validity of the category of Simple
Schizophrenia has been questioned (11, 12). The closest approximation is Schizotypal
Personality Disorder.
295.1 Schizophrenia, hebephrenic type . ...295.1x Schizophrenia, disorganized
                                                         type
The term "hebephrenic" in this country has included only cases with regressive and
silly behavior whereas the more common meaning has emphasized the disorganized
aspect of the behavior (13).
295.2 Schizophrenia, catatonic type
295.23 Schizophrenia, catatonic type,
                                              [295.2x Schizophrenia, catatonic type
           excited
                                           '''l296.4x Bipolar disorder, manic*
295.24 Schizophrenia, catatonic type,
           withdrawn
Because of changes in the concepts of Schizophrenia and Affective Disorders, some
cases of the DSM-ll category of catatonic type will be diagnosed as having an Affec-
tive Disorder in DSM-III (14).
295.3 Schizophrenia, paranoid type 295.3x Schizophrenia, paranoid type
                                             (295.40 Schizophreniform disorder
295.4 Acute schizophrenic episode j 298.80 Brief reactive psychosis*
                                             1295.70 Schizoaffective disorder*
The DSM-III category of Schizophrenia requires a duration of six months (including
prodromal and residual phases), as this criterion defines a group that is more homo-
geneous with regard to familial pattern and course (15, 16, 17).
                                             301.22 Schizotypal personality dis
295.5 Schizophrenia latent type
                                             301.83 Borderline personality disorder
The criteria for Schizotypal Personality Disorder were developed to identify a group
of individuals clinically diagnosed as having Borderline Schizophrenia, a term included
with the DSM-ll category (18). However, this category is not included with the DSM-III
category of Schizophrenia, since the category requires psychotic features at some time
during the illness. Some individuals diagnosed as having Schizophrenia, Latent Type,
in DSM-ll may meet the criteria for Borderline Personality Disorder in DSM-III, instead
of, or in addition to, Schizotypal Personality Disorder (18).
                                              295.6x Schizophrenia, residual type
                                              296.x4 Major affective disorder (de-
295.6    Schizophrenia, residual type
                                                         pressed or manic) with psy-
295.7    Schizophrenia, schizo-affective
                                                         chotic features*
           type
                                              296.40 Schizophreniform disorder
295.73   Schizophrenia, schizo-affective
                                              298.80 Brief reactive psychosis*
           type, excited
                                              295.xx Schizophrenia with superim-
295.74   Schizophrenia, schizo-affective
                                                         posed Atypical affective dis-
           type, depressed
                                                         order*
                                              295.70   Schizoaffective disorder


                               Comparative Listing of DSM-II and DSM-lll 375

DSM-II DSM-lll
DSM-lll acknowledges that certain bizarre psychotic symptoms are not incompatible
with otherwise fully validated Affective Disorder (19). The other DSM-lll categories
are included here because of the heterogeneous nature of individuals previously
classified as having Schizo-affective Schizophrenia (20, 21). In DSM-lll Schizoaffective
Disorder is a residual category, not included in Schizophrenia, and is to be used when
there is uncertainty about the differential diagnosis between an Affective Disorder and
either Schizophrenia, Schizophreniform Disorder, or Paranoid Disorder.

                                             299.0x Infantile autism
295.8 Schizophrenia, chidhood                299.9x Childhood onset pervasive de-
                                                        velopmental disorder
When children or adolescents have an illness that meets the criteria for Schizophrenia
in DSM-lll that diagnosis is given. There is evidence that the syndrome of Infantile
Autism has little relationship to the psychotic disorders of adult life, particularly adult
onset Schizophrenia (22). The relationship between the DSM-lll category of Childhood
Onset Pervasive Developmental Disorder and the psychotic disorders of adult life is
unclear (23, 24, 25). The criteria for this disorder describe children who have been
described by some clinicians as Childhood Schizophrenia, Childhood Psychosis, Atypi-
cal Children, and Symbiotic Psychosis. It is likely that some children with this disorder
will indeed develop Schizophrenia as adults. However, there is currently no way of
predicting which children will develop Schizophrenia as adults.

295.9 Schizophrenia, chronic undifferen-
         tiated type 295.9x Schizophrenia, undifferentiated
                                                        type
Major Affective Disorders Major Affective Disorders

In DSM-II Major Affective Disorders were included within the Non-organic Psychoses,
and Affective Disorders that seemed to be "related directly to a precipitating life ex-
perience" were excluded. In contrast, the DSM-lll category of Affective Disorders
groups all the Affective Disorders together, regardless of the presence or absence of
psychotic features or association with precipitating life experiences.
The DSM-lll classification recognizes the heterogeneous nature of a major depres-
sive episode (26) and uses the term melancholia to designate the subtype that tends
to be more severe, associated with a constellation of characteristic symptoms, and is
apparently particularly responsive to somatic therapy (27).
296.0 Involutional melancholia 296.23                 Major depression, single epi-
                                                        sode with melancholia or
                                                        296.24 with psychotic fea-
                                                        tures
There is no compelling evidence that depression occurring in the involutional period
is distinct from depression occurring at other stages of life (28).
296.1 Manic-depressive illness, manic type 296.4x Bipolar disorder, manic*
Since virtually all individuals with manic episodes eventually develop depressive
episodes, most investigators now conceptualize manic episodes as being subsumed
under Bipolar Disorder (29). Therefore, in DSM-lll, the diagnosis of Bipolar Disorder
is made when there is a manic episode, whether or not there has been a depressive
episode.
296.2 Manic-depressive illness, depressed
         type Major depression
                                               296.2x single episode
                                               296.3x recurrent


376 Appendix C

DSM-II DSM-III
296.3 Manic-depressive illness, circular
         type                           Bipolar disorder
296.33 manic                             296.4x manic
296.34 depressed                          296.5X DEPRESSED
                                          296.6x mixed
The DSM-II classification implied the unity of manic-depressive illness. DSM-III ac-
cepts the evidence pointing to the importance of the distinction between unipolar and
bipolar forms of Affective Disorder (30, 31).

Paranoid States                         pARANOI
297.0 Paranoia                          297.10

                             / 297.10 Paranoia*
297.1 Involutional paranoiK d state ......... •S^«^ «« *. • i 
                   \297.90 Atypical paranoid disorder*

There is no compelling evidence that a Paranoid Disorder occurring in the involu-
tional period is distinct from Paranoid Disorders occurring in other periods of life (32).
                                       297.30 Shared paranoid disorder
This category is the traditional category of Folie a deux. The justification for its in-
clusion in DSM-III, despite its rarity, rests on the distinct clinical picture and the treat-
ment implications (33, 34).
                                        298.30 Acute paranoid disorder
This category permits the identification of the most common form of Paranoid Dis-
order which is of acute onset and of brief duration (32).
298.0 Psychotic depressive reaction ....... 296.24 Major depression, single epi-
                                                 sode, with psychotic fea-
                                                 tures,* with coding of sever-
                                                 ity of psychosocial stressor
                                                 on Axis IV
There is no compelling evidence that once a Major Depression has developed, its
course and response to treatment are affected by whether or not its onset was asso-
ciated with a stressor.

IV Neuroses
In DSM-II disorders in which the "chief characteristic" was anxiety, whether "felt and
expressed directly" or "controlled unconsciously and automatically by conversion, dis-
placement and various other psychological mechanisms" were grouped together as
Neuroses. In contrast, in DSM-III the disorders in which anxiety is experienced directly
are grouped together in the class of Anxiety Disorders. The other DSM-II neuroses are
distributed among other classes, each defined by shared symptoms or other descrip-
tive characteristics. So that one can identify the categories that in DSM-II were
grouped together in the class of Neuroses, the DSM-II terms are included separately in
parentheses after the corresponding DSM-III categories. (See DSM-III classification.)

                                        300.01 pANIC DISORDER
300.0 Anxiety neuros.s                  300.02 gENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER

There is compelling evidence that Panic Disorder, as a distinct entity, has differen-
tial treatment response as compared with other disorders in which anxiety is promi-
nent (35, 36).


                                Comparative Listing of DSM-II and DSM-III 377

DSM-II DSM-III
300.13 Hysterical neurosis
In DSM-III, the concept and the term "hysteria" have been avoided. Instead, the mul-
tiple meanings of the term have been included within new categories, such as Somato-
form Disorders and Dissociative Disorders (37).

                                             [300.11 Coversion disorder
300.1 Hystencal neuros.s, convers.on type    307.80 Psychogenic pain disorder

This latter DSM-III category permits the identification of individuals whose pre-
dominant complaint is pain, apparently of psychogenic origin (38).
                                              300.12 Psychogenic amnesia
300.14   Hysterical neurosis, dissociative    300.13 Psychogenic fugue
           type                               300.14 Multiple personality
                                              307.46 Sleepwalking disorder*
                                                         (in the childhood section)
 In DSM-III, the four disorders included in the DSM-II description are defined as sepa-
 rate disorders because of differing clinical pictures, predisposing factors, and course
 (39, 40). The first three disorders are included within the Dissociative Disorders.
Sleepwalking Disorder is listed in the section Disorders Usually First Evident in Infancy,
 Childhood or Adolescence and is defined as a disturbance of a particular stage of
 sleep (41,42).
                                              Phobic disorders
                                              300.21 Agoraphobia with panic attacks
                                              300.22 Agoraphobia without panic at-
                                                         tacks
 300.2 Phobic neurosis                      < 300.23 Social phobia
                                              300.29 Simple phobia
                                              309.21 Separation anxiety disorder*
                                                         (in the childhood section)
 DSM-III subdivides phobias into separate categories because of differing clinical pic-
 tures, ages at onset, and differential treatment responses (43). Even though Separation
 Anxiety Disorder is a form of Phobia, because it characteristically begins in infancy
 or childhood, and rarely persists into adulthood, it is classified in the section "Dis-
 orders Usually First Evident in Infancy, Childhood or Adolescence" (44, 45).
 300.3 Obsessive compulsive neurosis 300.30 Obsessive compulsive disorder
                                              Major depression
                                              296.22 single episode, without mel-
                                                          ancholia
                                              296.32 recurrent, without melancho-
 300.4 Depressive neurosis
                                                          lia
                                              300.40 Dysthymic disorder
                                              309.00 Adjustment disorder with de-
                                                          pressed mood
 The DSM-II category was defined merely as "an excessive reaction of depression due
 to an internal conflict or to an identifiable event . . ." For this reason, it was applied
 to a heterogeneous group of conditions (46). The three major conditions to which it
 was applied have each been defined descriptively without reference to etiology.
 When an "identifiable event" is judged to have contributed to the development of
 the illness, this factor can be noted on Axis IV.
 300.5 Neurasthenic neurosis
 This DSM-II category was rarely used.


378 Appendix C

DSM-II DSM-III
300.6 Depersonalization neurosis 300.60 Depersonalization disorder

The DSM-III category is included within the class of Dissociative Disorders, even
though this is controversial, because the feeling of one's own reality, a component of
identity, is lost (47).

300.7 Hypochondriacal neurosis 300.70 Hypochondriasis

Hypochondriasis is included within the class of Somatoform Disorders because of the
presentation of symptoms suggestive of physical disorder.

                                             300.81 Somatization disorder
This disorder has been described in the literature as either "Hysteria" or "Briquet's
Syndrome" and validity data have been gathered in a series of studies (48).
                                             Post-traumatic stress disorder
                                             308.30 acute
                                             309.81 chronic or delayed

This DSM-III category used to be referred to as Traumatic Neurosis (49). Its subdivi-
sion into acute and chronic forms is justified by longitudinal studies showing differ-
ential outcomes for the two forms (50, 51, 52).

V Personality Disorders Personality Disorders
Personality Disorders in DSM-III are coded on Axis II in order to insure that they are
not overlooked when attention is directed to the usually more florid Axis I disorder.

DSM-III recognizes the distinction between personality traits and personality disorders.
For this reason, the term "disorder" appears in the diagnostic term. Although promi-
nent personality traits may be noted on Axis II, they are not given code numbers since
they do not represent mental disorders.

301.0 Paranoid personality 301.00 Paranoid personality disorder
301.1 Cyclothymic personality 301.13 Cyclothymic disorder

Cyclothymic disorder is included in DSM-III within the Affective Disorders rather than
the Personality Disorders, because of evidence that it is related to Bipolar Dis-
order (53).

                                             301.22 Schizotypal personality disorder
301.2 Schizoid personality..........         301.20 Schizoid personality disorder
                                            ( 301.82 Avoidant personality disorder*
The DSM-II category included "shyness, over-sensitivity, seclusiveness, avoidance of
close or competitive relationships, and often eccentricity." In DSM-III Schizotypal
Personality Disorder describes individuals with the eccentric features referred to in
the DSM-II description.
The criteria for Schizotypal Personality Disorder were developed to identify individ-
uals who had been described as having Borderline Schizophrenia (18). There is evi-
dence that Chronic Schizophrenia is more common among family members of indi-
viduals who were described as having Borderline Schizophrenia than in the general
population (54). The distinction between the DSM-III categories of Schizoid and
Avoidant Personality Disorders is based on whether or not there is a defect in the
motivation and capacity for emotional involvement (55). It is expected that this de-
scriptive distinction will have therapeutic and prognostic implications.


                                Comparative Listing of DSM-ll and DSM-III 379

DSM-ll DSM-III
301.3 Explosive personality 312.34 Intermittent explosive disorder*

Because the explosive behavior is, by definition, in contrast to the individual's usual
behavior, the disorder in DSM-III is not classified among the personality disorders.

301.4 Obsessive compulsive personality ... .301.40 Compulsive personality disor-
                                                         der

The DSM-III label omits the term "obsessive" in order to avoid confusion with Ob-
 sessive Compulsive Disorder.

301.5 Hysterical personality 301.50 Histrionic personality disorder

The term "hysterical" has many irrelevant historical connotations and suggests a rela-
 tionship to conversion symptoms (56, 57). The essential feature of this disorder, as
 described in both DSM-ll and DSM-III, is the histrionic pattern of behavior.

301.6 Asthenic personality

This DSM-ll category was rarely used.

301.7 Antisocial personality 301.70 Antisocial personality disorder

The DSM-III description and criteria are based on longitudinal studies of children
whose antisocial behavior persisted into adult life (58).

301.81 Passive-aggressive personality 301.84 Passive-aggressive personality
                                                         disorder

301.82 Inadequate personality

This DSM-ll category was defined primarily in terms of functional impairment, rather
 than a distinctive behavior pattern.

                                              301.81 Narcissistic personality disorder

 In recent years considerable attention has been given to narcissistic disturbances in
 personality in the psychoanalytic literature (59, 60).

                                              301.83 Borderline personality disorder

This category identifies a constellation of relatively enduring personality features of
 instability and vulnerability believed to have important treatment and outcome im-
 plications (61). The criteria for this category are supported by the results of a factor
 analytic study of symptom data of patients clinically designated as having a border-
 line condition and are consistent with the literature describing borderline conditions
 (18). Some of these individuals were diagnosed as having Schizophrenia, latent type,
 in DSM-ll.

                                              301.60 Dependent personality disorder

 This category is roughly equivalent to the DSM-I category of Passive aggressive per-
 sonality, dependent type.

 Sexual Deviations Paraphilias

 The term "paraphilias" is preferable to "sexual deviations" in that it correctly em-
 phasizes that the deviation (para) is in that to which the individual is attracted
 (philia).


380 Appendix C

DSM-II DSM-III
302.0 Homosexuality (replaced in 1973 302.00 Ego-dystonic homosexuality (in-
         with Sexual orientation dis- eluded in Other Psychosexual
          turbance) Disorders)

Whether or not homosexuality per se should be classified as a mental disorder has
been the focus of considerable controversy (62). In December 1973, the Board of
Trustees of the American Psychiatric Association voted to eliminate homosexuality
per se as a mental disorder and to substitute a new category, Sexual Orientation Dis-
turbance, reserved for those homosexuals who are "disturbed by, in conflict with, or
wish to change their sexual orientation." This change appeared in the seventh and
subsequent printings of DSM-II.

The removal of homosexuality per se from DSM-II was supported by the following
rationale: The crucial issue in determining whether or not homosexuality per se should
be regarded as a mental disorder is not the etiology of the condition, but its conse-
quences and the definition of mental disorder (63). A significant proportion of homo-
sexuals are apparently satisfied with their sexual orientation, show no significant signs
of manifest psychopathology (unless homosexuality, by itself, is considered psycho-
pathology), and are able to function socially and occupationally with no impairment
(64, 65, 66, 67). If one uses the criteria of distress or disability, homosexuality per se
is not a mental disorder. If one uses the criterion of inherent disadvantage, it is not at
all clear that homosexuality is a disadvantage in all cultures or subcultures (68, 69).

In DSM-III, the category of Ego-dystonic Homosexuality is a modification of the
DSM-II category of Sexual Orientation Disturbance. The change in terminology was
made to make it clear that the category is limited to individuals with a homosexual
arousal pattern. Changes in the definition of the category emphasize the impairment
in heterosexual functioning. Ego-dystonic Homosexuality is not included as a Paraphilia
in DSM-III, in contrast to the inclusion of both Homosexuality and Sexual Orientation
Disturbance in DSM-II as Sexual Deviations, because in DSM-III the Paraphilias are
limited to conditions that are associated with (1) preference for the use of a non-
human object for sexual arousal, (2) repetitive sexual activity with humans involving
real or simulated suffering or humiliation, or (3) repetitive sexual activity with non-
consenting or inappropriate partners. In contrast, the DSM-II category of Sexual De-
viations also included those "Individuals whose sexual interests are directed primarily
toward objects other than people of the opposite sex."

302.1 Fetishism 302.81 Fetishism
302.2 Pedophilia 302.20 Pedophilia
302.3 Transvestism 302.30 Transvestism
302.4 Exhibitionism 302.40 Exhibitionism
302.5 Voyeurism 302.82 Voyeurism
302.6 Sadism 302.84 Sexual sadism
302.7 Masochism 302.83 Sexual masochism

The DSM-III terms for the last two categories above avoid any confusion with non-
sexual meanings of these terms.

                                              302.10 Zoophilia (70)

                                              Gender Identity Disorders

                                              302.5x Transsexualism (71, 72)
                                              302.60 Gender identity disorder of
                                                         childhood (73)


                               Comparative Listing of DSM-II and DSM-lll 381

DSM-II DSM-lll
                                              Psychosexual Dysfunctions

                                              302.71 Inhibited sexual desire
                                              302.72 Inhibited sexual excitement
                                              302.73 Inhibited female orgasm
                                              302.74 Inhibited male orgasm
                                              302.75 Premature ejaculation
                                              302.76 Functional dyspareunia
                                              306.51 Functional vaginismus

DSM-II listed, as examples of Psychophysiologic Genito-urinary Disorder, both Dys-
pareunia and Impotence, whose DSM-lll equivalents are Functional Dyspareunia and
Inhibited Sexual Excitement (in a male). The justification for including the other speci-
fic Psychosexual Dysfunctions rests on their clinical importance and differential treat-
ments (74, 75).

Alcoholism Alcohol Abuse and Dependence (in-
                                                cluded within Substance Use Disor-
                                                ders)

In DSM-lll, the equivalent categories are included within the Substance Use Dis-
orders to emphasize the fact that the effects of the maladaptive use of alcohol are
similar to the effects of the maladaptive use of other substances of potential abuse
and dependence.

303.0 Episodic excessive drinking 305.02 Alcohol abuse, episodic*
303.1 Habitual excessive drinking 305.01 Alcohol abuse, continuous*
303.2 Alcohol addiction 303.9x Alcohol dependence

In DSM-lll, for each Substance Use Disorder, the course of the illness may be noted
in the fifth digit as continuous, episodic, or in remission.
Drug Dependence Substance Use Disorders
The DSM-II Drug Dependence category included what in DSM-lll is referred to as
Substance Abuse and Substance Dependence. In DSM-II, the term "dependence"
included both psychological dependence and physiological dependence. In DSM-
 lll, dependence is used only in the physiological sense and requires evidence of
either tolerance or withdrawal. The DSM-II Drug Dependence category specifically
excluded alcohol (coded separately) and tobacco, whereas these substances are both
 included within the DSM-lll Substance Use Disorders.
304.0 Drug dependence, opium, opium
          alkaloids and their derivatives    J305.5x Opioid abuse
 304.1 Drug dependence, synthetic anal-      (304.0x Opioid dependence
          gesics with morphine-like effects
                                              305.4x Barbiturate or similarly acting
 304.2 Drug dependence, barbiturates                     sedative or hypnotic abuse
 304.3 Drug dependence, other hypnotics       304.1 x Barbiturate or similarly acting
          and sedatives or "tranquilizers"               sedative or hypnotic depen-
                                                         dence
 304.4 Drug dependence, cocaine 305.6x Cocaine abuse
 304.5 Drug dependence, Cannabis sativa
          (hashish, marihuana) \ 305.2x Cannabis abuse
                                             (304.3x Cannabis dependence
 The existence and significance of tolerance or withdrawal with regular heavy use of
 cannabis (Cannabis Dependence) is controversial (76, 77).


 382 Appendix C

 DSM-II DSM-III
 304.6 Drug dependence, other psycho- 305Jx Amphetamine or similarly act-
         stimulants (amphetamines' etc.)                . '"g sympathom.met.c 
                        K                     4.4x Amphetamine or similarly act-
                                                         ing sympathomimetic
                                                         dependence
 304.7 Drug dependence, hallucinogens . ...305.3x Hallucinogen abuse
 No withdrawal syndrome from hallucinogens has ever been described.
                                              305.9x Phencyclidine (PCP) or similarly
                                                         acting arylcyclohexylamine
                                                         abuse

 This relatively new substance of abuse is distinguished from hallucinogens, despite
 some similarities in their effects (78).
                                              305.1x Tobacco dependence
 The justification for the inclusion of Tobacco Dependence in DSM-III (as it is in the
 Ninth Revision of the International Classification of Diseases) rests on the serious
 medical complications of long-term use (79, 80, 81). It could be argued that the
 absence of both an intoxication state and the kinds of social complications associated
 with other substances of dependence speak for classifying Tobacco Dependence as a
 physical disorder, not a mental disorder. However, the behavioral manifestations of the
 dependence (inability to control use) and the withdrawal syndrome are by no means
 inconsequential. Furthermore, by tradition, substance dependence is classified as
 a mental disorder.

                                              304.7x Dependence on combination of
                                                         opioid and other non-
                                                         alcoholic substance
                                              304.8x Dependence on combination of
                                                         substances, excluding opioids
                                                         and alcohol
 These two categories are necessary to indicate poly-substance use when it is not pos-
 sible to identify all the specific substances involved.

VI Psychophysiologic Disorders 316.00 Psychological Factors Affecting
                                                         Physical Condition*

 The DSM-ll approach to the classification of so-called "psychophysiologic" or "psy-
 chosomatic disorders" had several practical and theoretical shortcomings. The cate-
 gories of psychophysiologic disorders were rarely used. The choice between a psycho-
 physiological diagnosis and an "organic" diagnosis tended to be made idiosyncrati-
 cally. The DSM-II approach did not encourage collaboration between psychiatrists and
 other medical specialists. The theoretical basis for the category perpetuated a simplis-
 tic, unicausational concept about disease etiology. The DSM-III approach attempts to
 overcome these shortcomings by the use of the multiaxial system. When the clinician
 judges that a psychological factor is associated with either the initiation or exacerba-
 tion of a physical condition or disorder, the category of Psychological Factors Affect-
 ing Physical Condition is noted on Axis I. The physical condition or disorder is noted
 on Axis III. The limitations of the DSM-II approach and the potential advantages of
 this approach are discussed more fully elsewhere (82, 83).

 VII Special Symptoms
 This section of DSM-II was intended for "discrete, specific symptoms" as distinguished


                               cOMPARATIVE lISTING OF dsm-ii AND dsm-iii 383

DSM-II DSM-III
from mental disorders. The names of the symptoms were listed with no descriptions.
In DSM-III most of these "symptoms" are included as mental disorders because of
their syndromal nature (e.g., Anorexia Nervosa), or because they represent a distinct
clinical pattern (e.g., Functional Enuresis).
306.0 Speech disturbance 307.00 Stuttering
The only speech disturbance included in DSM-III is Stuttering. Other speech distur-
bances are unlikely to come to the attention of a mental health professional.
                                             Specific Developmental Disorders
                                             315.00 Developmental reading dis-
                                                        order
                                             315.10 Developmental arithmetic dis-
                                                        order
                                             315.31 Developmental language dis-
306.1 Specific learning disturbance 
                                                        order
                                             315.39 Developmental articulation dis-
                                                        order
                                             315.50 Mixed specific developmental
                                                        disorder

The DSM-III term, Specific Developmental Disorders, indicates that these disorders
are characterized by specific delays in development. Because of differential treatment
implications they are divided according to the predominant area of functioning that is
impaired (84, 85, 86, 87, 88). They are coded on Axis II in order to insure that they are
considered when the individual has a more florid Axis I disorder.
                                             Stereotyped movement disorders
                                            307.21 Transient tic disorder
306.2 Tihc307.22 Chronic motor tic disorder
                                             307.23 Tourette's disorder
The three major forms of Tic Disorders are described separately because of differing
clinical pictures, courses, and treatment implications (89).
                                            (307.46* Sleepwalking disorder
306.4 D,sorders of sleep \WA6* Sleep terror disorder
Of the many disorders of sleep, DSM-III includes only these two because of their
marked behavioral manifestations, because of the frequency with which they come
to the attention of a mental health professional, and because, by tradition, they are
thought of as mental disorders (41, 90, 91). (A new classification of Sleep and Arousal
Disorders appears in Appendix E.)
                                             Eating disorders
                                             307.10 Anorexia nervosa
                                             307.51 Bulimia
306.5 Feeding disturbance
                                             307.52 Pica
                                             307.53 Rumination disorder of infancy
The Eating Disorders are described separately because of differing clinical pictures,
courses, and treatment implications (92).
306.6 Enuresis 307.60 Functional enuresis
306.7 Encopresis 307.70 Functional encopresis
The DSM-III terms emphasize the exclusion of known physical etiology.
* Not an error. The same code is used to maintain compatibility with ICD-9-CM.


384 Appendix C

DSM-II                                        DSM-III
306.80 Cephalalgia

It is not clear what was included within this DSM-II category.

VIII Transient Situational Disturbances .... Adjustment Disorder

The DSM-II category was "reserved for more or less transient disorders of any severity
(including those of psychotic proportions) that occur in individuals without any ap-
parent underlying mental disorders . . ."

The DSM-III category of Adjustment Disorder excludes reactions of psychotic propor-
tion since they are adequately classified elsewhere. Adjustment Disorder can be given
as an additional diagnosis to an individual with an underlying disorder, e.g., a Per-
sonality Disorder, since there is evidence that individuals with Personality Disorders
are particularly vulnerable to stress (93).

The DSM-II classification of Transient Situational Disturbances by developmental
stage, infancy to late life, offered no information about the manifestations of the dis-
turbance that would be of importance in planning treatment. For this reason, in DSM-
III Adjustment Disorder is subtyped by predominant symptomatology.

                                             309.00 with depressed mood
                                             309.24 with anxious mood
307.0 Adjustment reaction of infancy
                                             309.28 with mixed emotional features
307.1 Adjustment reaction of childhood       309.30 with disturbance of conduct
307.2 Adjustment reaction of
                                             309.40 with mixed disturbance of emo-
         adolescence
                                                        tions and conduct
307.3 Adjustment reaction of adult life
                                             309.23 with work (or academic) inhibi-
307.4 Adjustment reaction of late life                  tion
                                             309.83 with withdrawal

IX Behavior Disorders of Childhood           Disorders Usually First Evident in In-
    and Adolescence                             fancy, Childhood, or Adolescence

The DSM-II category was limited to a small number of categories appropriate only
for children or adolescents. They were conceptualized as midway between Transient
Situational Disturbances, on one hand, and Psychoses, Neuroses and Personality Dis-
orders, on the other hand, in terms of stability and resistance to treatment. In con-
trast, the DSM-III section includes a large number of diagnoses of varying degrees of
severity and stability. Furthermore, when appropriate, some of the diagnoses may be
given to adults.

308.0 Hyperkinetic reaction of childhood
          (or adolescence) 314.01                     Attention deficit disorder, with
                                                        hyperactivity

The DSM-III term is used to reflect the observation that attentional dfficulties are
prominent and virtually always present in hyperkinetic children. Alternative terms for
this disorder, such as Minimal Brain Dysfunction, are based on unproven assumptions
(94, 95).

                                             313.21 Avoidant disorder of childhood
308.1 Withdrawing reaction of childhood                 or adolescence
          (or adolescence)                   313.22 Schizoid disorder of childhood
                                                        or adolescence


                                Comparative Listing of DSM-II and DSM-III 385

 DSM-II DSM-III
The distinction between Avoidant and Schizoid Disorders of Childhood or Adoles-
cence is based on whether or not there is a defect in the motivation and capacity for
 emotional involvement. It is expected that this descriptive distinction will have thera-
 peutic and prognostic implications.
308.2 Overanxious reaction of childhood
          (or adolescence) 313.00 Overanxious disorder
 308.3 Runaway reaction of childhood
          (or adolescence) 312.10 Conduct disorder, under-
                                                         socialized, nonaggressive
308.4 Unsocialized aggressive reaction of
          childhood (or adolescence) 312.00 Conduct disorder, under-
                                                         socialized, aggressive
308.5 Group delinquent reaction of            312.23 Conduct disorder, socialized,
          childhood (or adolescence) .                   aggressive
                                              312.21 Conduct disorder, socialized,
                                                         nonaggressive
 In DSM-III the category of Conduct Disorder includes cases in which there is a re-
 petitive and persistent pattern of aggressive or non-aggressive conduct in which either
 the rights of others or major age-appropriate societal norms or rules are violated. The
 subdivision of Conduct Disorder is controversial. There is evidence that the frequency
 and the variety of childhood antisocial behaviors are predictive of adult antisocial be-
 havior (96, 97, 98). At the same time, there is evidence that the presence or the
 absence of adequate social attachments (socialization) in children with antisocial be-
 havior has prognostic significance (99, 100). The DSM-III approach divides Conduct
 Disorder into four subtypes. The justification for the aggressive-nonaggressive distinc-
 tion rests on an obvious difference in clinical picture, with management considera-
 tions. The socialized-undersocialized dichotomy is likely to have treatment implica-
 tions, even if the prognostic implications are still unclear.

                                              314.00 Attention deficit disorder, with-
                                                         out hyperactivity

 It is clinically recognized that some children with attentional difficulties have never
 had concomitant hyperactivity (101).
                                              314.80 Attention deficit disorder, resid-
                                                         ual type
There is evidence that some individuals who, as children, had Attention Deficit Dis-
 order with Hyperactivity, in adolescence or adulthood no longer have hyperactivity,
 although they continue to have attentional difficulties (102, 103).

                                              313.89 Reactive attachment disorder of
                                                         infancy

This category has been described in the literature under a variety of names, including
 "failure to thrive without organic basis" (104, 105).

                                              313.23 Elective mutism

This is a well-recognized syndrome (106, 107).

                                              313.81 Oppositional disorder

This category was included as a Personality Disorder in a classification of disorders
 in childhood proposed by the Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry (108). It is


386 Appendix C

DSM-II DSM-III
included in DSM-III in modified form and is to be distinguished from Passive-Aggres-
sive Personality Disorder and from Conduct Disorder, Socialized, Nonaggressive.
                                             313.82 Identity disorder
There is a large literature on identity problems in adolescence (109, 110). This category
is to be distinguished from the DSM-III category of Borderline Personality Disorder.
                                             Disorders with no corresponding DSM-
                                                II categories
                                             Factitious Disorders
                                             300.16 Factitious disorder with psycho-
                                                        logical symptoms
                                             301.51 Chronic factitious disorder with
                                                        physical symptoms (Mun-
                                                        chausen syndrome)
The prototype of Factitious Disorders, Munchausen Syndrome, has been recognized
in the literature (111, 112), as have other factitious illnesses with physical symptoms,
such as Factitious Dermatitis (113). Despite the rarity of these disorders, it seems use-
ful to distinguish them as a class of disorders (37).
                                              Disorders of Impulse Control Not Else-
                                             where Classified
                                             312.31 Pathological gambling
                                             312.32 Kleptomania
                                              312.33 Pyromania
                                             312.35 Isolated explosive disorder
These disorders have been recognized in the literature as having distinct clinical pic-
tures with differing treatment implications and with obvious relevance to forensic
issues (114, 115, 116, 117, 118). In DSM-III, this class also includes Intermittent Ex-
plosive Disorder, which is roughly equivalent to the DSM-II category of Explosive Per-
sonality Disorder, as noted above.
X Conditions Without Manifest Psychiatric
    Disorder and Non-Specific Conditions
316 Social Maladjustments Without Mani-
     fest Psychiatric Disorder V Codes for Conditions Not Attributable
                                             to a Mental Disorder That Are a Focus
                                              of Attention or Treatment
The DSM-II category was limited to "individuals who are psychiatrically normal but
who nevertheless have severe enough problems to warrant examination by a psy-
chiatrist." No definition of normality was provided. As the DSM-III name implies, these
categories may be given to an individual who has a mental disorder, as long as the
condition itself is not attributable to a mental disorder.
316.0 Marital maladjustment V61.10 Marital problem
316.1 Social maladjustment V62.89 Phase of life problem or other
                                                         life circumstance problem*
316.2 Occupational maladjustment V62.20 Occupational problem
                                              V71.01 Adult antisocial behavior
316.3Dyssocial                                V71.02 Childhood or adolescent anti-
                                                         social behavior
                                              V65.20 Malingering
Malingering (119) has been included because of its obvious relevance to forensic
psychiatry.


                                Comparative Listing of DSM-II and DSM-III 387

 DSM-II DSM-III
                                              V62.30 Academic problem
                                              V62.82 Uncomplicated bereavement
                                              V15.81 Noncompliance with medical
                                                         treatment
                                              V61.20 Parent-child problem
                                              V61.80 Other specified family circum-
                                                          stance
                                              V62.81 Other interpersonal problem
 It seems useful to be able to distinguish these problems from mental disorders. The
study of bereavement has made it possible to distinguish it from Major Depression
 (120, 121).
                                              300.90 Unspecified mental disorder
317 Non-specific conditions                              (non-psychotic)
                                              298.90 Atypical psychosis

                                              V71.09 No diagnosis or condition on
318 No mental disorder                                    Axis I
                                              V71.09 No diagnosis on Axis II

                                              799.90 Diagnosis or condition deferred
319 Diagnosis deferred                                    on Axis I
                                              799.90 Diagnosis deferred on Axis II


388 Appendix C

                              REFERENCES

 1. Gross HJ: Manual on Terminology and 12. Stone AA, Hopkins R, Mahnke MW,
    Classification in Mental Retardation.  et al: Simple schizophrenia: syndrome
    Baltimore, Garamond/Pridemark Press,   or shibboleth. Am J Psychiatry 125:61-
    1977, p. 19                            68, 1968
 2. Gift TE, Strauss JS, Ritzier BA: Failure 13. Tsuang M, Winokur G: Criteria for
    to detect low IQ in psychiatric assess- subtyping schizophrenia: clinical dif-
    ment. Am J Psychiatry 135:345-349,     ferentiation of hebephrenic and para-
    1978                                   noid schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychia-
 3. Lipowski ZJ: Organic brain syn-        try 31:43-47, 1974
    dromes: a reformulation. Comprehen- 14. Abrams R, Taylor MA: Catatonia: pre-
    sive Psychiatry 19:309-322, 1978       diction of response to somatic treat-
 4. Seltzer B, Sherwin I: "Organic Brain   ments. Am J Psychiatry 134:78-80, 1977
    Syndromes": An empirical study and 15. Astrup C, Noreik K: Functional Psy-
    critical review. Am J Psychiatry 135:13- choses: Diagnostic and Prognostic
    21, 1978                               Models. Springfield, 111, Charles C
 5. Wells CE: Chronic brain diseases: an   Thomas, 1966
    overview. Am J Psychiatry 135:1-21,
                                       16. Sartorius N, Jablensky A, Shapiro R:
    1978
                                           Cross cultural differences in the short
 6. Goodwin DW, Hill SY: Chronic effects   term prognosis of schizophrenic psy-
    of alcohol and other psychoactive drugs choses. Schizophrenia Bull 4:102-113,
    on intellect, learning and memory, in  1978
    Alcohol, Drugs and Brain Damage.
                                       17. Tsuang MT, Dempsey GM, Rauscher
    Edited by Rankin, JG. Toronto, Addic-
    tion Research Foundation, 1975, pp 55- F: A study of "atypical schizophrenia".
    71                                     Arch Gen Psychiatry 33:1157-1160,
                                           1976
 7. Fisher CM: Dementia and cerebral
    vascular disease, in Cerebral Vascular 18. Spitzer RL, Endicott J, Gibbon M:
    Diseases: Sixth Conference. Edited by  Crossing the border into borderline per-
    Toole JF, Siekert RG, Whisnant JP.     sonality and borderline schizophrenia:
    New York, Grune & Stratton, 1969,      the development of criteria. Arch Gen
    pp 232-236                             Psychiatry 36:17-24, 1979
  8. Hachinski VC, Lassen NA, Marshall J: 19. Pope HG Jr, Lipinski J: Diagnosis in
    Multi-infarct dementia: a cause of men- schizophrenia and manic-depressive ill-
    tal deterioration in the elderly. Lancet ness: a reassessment of the specificity
    2:207-210, 1974                        of "schizophrenic" symptoms in the
                                           light of current research. Arch Gen
  9. Spitzer RL, Andreasen N, Endicott J:  Psychiatry 35:811-828, 1978
    Schizophrenia and other psychotic dis-
    orders in DSM-III. Schizophrenia Bull 20. Procci WR: Schizo-affective psychosis:
    4:489-509,1978                         fact or fiction?: A survey of the litera-
                                           ture. Arch Gen Psychiatry 33:1167-
 10. Kendell RE, Brockington IF, Leff JP:  1178, 1976
    Prognostic implications of six alterna-
    tive definitions of schizophrenia. Arch 21. Brockington IF, Leff JP: Schizo-affec-
    Gen Psychiatry 36:25-34, 1979          tive psychosis: definitions and inci-
                                           dence. Psychological Med 9:91-99, 1979
 11. Munoz RA, Kulak G, Marten S, et al:
    Simple and hebephrenic schizophrenia: 22. Rutter M, Schopler E: Autism: A Re-
                                           appraisal of Concepts and Treatments.
    a follow-up study in Life History Re-
                                           New York, Plenum Press, 1978
    search, in Psychopathology, Volume II.
    Edited by Roff M, Robins L, Pollack M. 23. Rutter M: The development of infantile
    Minneapolis, University of Minnesota   autism. Psychological Med 4:147-163,
    Press, 1972, pp 228-235                1974


                          Comparative Listing of DSM-II and DSM-III 389

                             REFERENCES

24. Kolvin I, et al: Studies in the childhood 38. Sternbach RA: Pain: A Psychophysio-
   psychoses, I-VI. Br J Psychiatry 118:  logical Analysis. New York, Academic
   381-419, 1971                          Press, 1968
25. Brown J: Follow up of children with 39. Nemiah J: Hysterical neurosis, dissocia-
   atypical development (infantile psy-   tive type, in Comprehensive Textbook
   chosis). Am J Orthopsychiatry 33:855-  of Psychiatry, 2nd ed, vol I. Edited by
   861, 1963                              Freedman A, Kaplan H, Sadock B. Bal-
26. Nelson JC, Charney DS: Primary af-    timore, Williams & Wilkins, 1975, pp
   fective disorder criteria and the en-  1220-1231
   dogenous-reactive distinction. Arch Gen 40. Ludwig AM, Brandsma JM, Wilbur CB:
   Psychiatry (in press)                  The objective study of multiple per-
27. Bielski RJ, Friedel RO: Prediction of sonality. Arch Gen Psychiatry 26:298-
    tricyclic antidepressant response: a  310, 1972
   critical review. Arch Gen Psychiatry 33: 41. Jacobson A, Kales JD, Kales A: Clinical
   1479-1489, 1976                        and electrophysiological correlates of
28. Weissman M: The myth of involutional  sleep disorders in children, in Sleep,
   melancholia. JAMA 242:742-744, 1979    Physiology and Pathology. Edited by
                                          Kales A. Philadelphia, JB Lippincott Co
29. Nurnberger J, Roose S, Dunner D, et al:
                                          1969, Chapter 8, pp 109-118
   Unipolar mania: a distinct clinical en-
   tity? Am J Psychiatry (in press)   42. Jacobson A, Kales A, Lehmann, et al:
30. Winokur G, Clayton P, Reich T: Manic  Somnambulism: all-night electro en-
                                          cephalographic studies. Science 148:
   Depressive Illness. St. Louis, CV Mosby
   Co, 1969                               975-977, 1965
                                       43. Marks I: Fears and Phobias. New York,
31. Ferris C: A study of bipolar (manic
                                          Academic Press, 1969, p 109
   depressive) and unipolar recurrent de-
   pressive psychosis. Acta Psychiatrica 44. Bowlby J: Separation anxiety: a critical
   Scand 42 (Suppl) :9-188, 1966          review of the literature. J Child Psy-
                                          chology and Psychiatry 1:251-259, 1960
32. Retterstol N: Paranoid and Paranoiac
   Psychosis. Springfield, 111, Charles C 45. Gittelman-Klein R, Klein DF: School
   Thomas, 1966                           phobia: diagnostic considerations in the
33. Gralnick A: Folie a deux, the psychoses light of imipramine effects. J Nerv
   of association: a review of 103 cases  Ment Dis 156:199-215, 1973
   and the entire English literature with 46. Klerman GL, Endicott J, Spitzer RL, et
   case presentations, Parts I and II.    al: Neurotic depression: a systematic
   Psychiatr Q 16:230-263, 491-520, 1942  analysis of multiple criteria and multi-
34. McNeil JN, Verwoerdt A, Peak D: Folie ple meanings. Am J Psychiatry 136:57-
   a deux in the aged: review and case    61, 1979
   report of role reversal. J Am Geriatric 47. Lehmann LS: Depersonalization. Am J
    Soc 20:316-323, 1972                  Psychiatry 131:1221-1224, 1974
35. Klein DF, Zitrin CM, Woerner MG:   48. Guze S: The validity and significance of
   Antidepressants, anxiety, panic and    the clinical diagnosis of hysteria (Bri-
   phobia, in Psychopharmacology: A       quet's syndrome). Am J Psychiatry 132:
    Generation of Progress. Edited by Lip- 138-141, 1975
    ton MA, DiMascio A, Killam KF. New
    York, Raven Press, 1978, pp 1401-1410 49. Keiser L: The Traumatic Neurosis.
                                          Philadelphia, JB Lippincott Co, 1968
36. Zitrin CM, Klein DF, Woerner MG:
    Behavior therapy, supportive psycho- 50. Kamman GR: Traumatic neurosis, com-
    therapy, imipramine and phobias. Arch pensation neurosis, or attitudinal pa-
    Gen Psychiatry 35:307-316, 1978       thosis. Arch Neurology and Psychiatry,
37. Hyler SE, Spitzer RL: Hysteria split  65:593-603, 1951
    asunder. Am J Psychiatry 135:1500- 51. Adler A: Neuropsychiatric complica-
    1504, 1978                            tions in victims of Boston's Cocoanut


390 Appendix C

                               REFERENCES

    Grove Disaster. JAMA 123:1098-1101,    Homosexuality in Modern Society.
    1943                                   Edited by Ruitenbeek HM. New York,
 52. Adler A: Mental symptoms following    Dutton, 1963, pp 141-161
    head injury: a statistical analysis of 66. Siegelman M: Adjustment of homo-
    200 cases. Arch Neurology and Psy-     sexual and heterosexual women. Br J
    chiatry, 53:34-43, 1945                Psychiatry 120:477-481, 1972
 53. Akiskal HS, Djenderedjian AH, Rosen- 67. Siegelman M: Adjustment of male
    thai RH, et al: Cyclothymic disorder:  homosexuals and heterosexuals. Ar-
    validating criteria for inclusion in the chives Sexual Behavior, 2:9-25, 1972
    bipolar affective group. Am J Psychia- 68. Ford CS, Beach FA: Patterns of Sexual
    try 134:1227-1233, 1977                Behavior. New York, Harper & Row,
 54. Rosenthal D, Kety SS: The transmis-   1970
     sion of schizophrenia. London, Perga- 69. Davenport W: Sexual patterns and their
    mon Press Ltd, 1968                    regulation in a society of the Southwest
 55. Millon T: Modern Psychopathology.     Pacific, in Sex and Behavior. Edited by
    Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1969, pp    Beach FA. New York, John Wiley &
     223-240                               Sons, 1965, pp 164-207
 56. Chodoff P, Lyons H: Hysteria, the  70. Shenken LI: Some clinical and psycho-
     hysterical personality and "hysterical pathological aspects of bestiality. J
    conversion". Am J Psychiatry 114:734-  Nerv Ment Dis 139:137-142, 1964
    740, 1958                           71. Benjamin H: The Transsexual Phe-
 57. Chodoff P: The diagnosis of hysteria: nomenon. New York, Julian Press Inc,
     an overview. Am J Psychiatry 131:1073- 1966
    1078, 1974                          72. Green R, Money J: Transsexualism and
 58. Robins L: Deviant children grown up.  Sex Reassignment. Baltimore, The Johns
    Huntington, New York, Robert E         Hopkins Press, 1969
     Kreiger, 1974                      73. Green R: Sexual Identity Conflict in
 59. Kohut H: Analysis of the Self: A Sys- Children and Adults. New York,
     tematic Approach to the Psychoanalytic Penguin, 1975
    Treatment of Narcissistic Personality 74. Masters WH, Johnson VE: Human
    Disorders. New York, International      Sexual Inadequacy. Boston, Little,
    Universities Press, 1971               Brown, 1970
 60. Kernberg O: Borderline Conditions and 75. Kaplan HS: The New Sex Therapy:
     Pathological Narcissism. New York, J  Active Treatment of Sexual Dysfunc-
    Aronson, 1975                          tion. New York, Brunner/Mazel, 1974
 61. Gunderson JG, Singer MT: Defining  76. Jones RT, Benowitz N, Bachman J:
    borderline patients: an overview. Am   Clinical studies of cannabis tolerance
    J Psychiatry 132:1-10, 1975            and dependence. Ann NY Acad Sci
 62. Stoller RJ, Marmor J, Bieber I, et al: V 282:221-239, 1976
     A symposium: should homosexuality  77. Petersen RC: Marihuana Research Find-
    be in the APA nomenclature? Am J       ings: 1976. NIDA Research Monograph
     Psychiatry 130:1207-1216, 1973        14. Rockville, Md, US Department of
 63. Spitzer RL, Endicott J: Medical and   Health, Education, and Welfare, July
    mental disorder: proposed definition   1977
    and criteria, in Critical Issues in Psy- 78. Petersen RC, Stillman RC: Phencycli-
    chiatric Diagnosis. Edited by Spitzer  dine (PCP) Abuse: An Appraisal. Na-
    RL, Klein DF. New York, Raven Press,   tional Institute on Drug Abuse Re-
     1978, pp 15-39                        search Monograph 21. Rockville, Md,
 64. Bell AP, Weinberg MS: Homosexuali-    US Department of Health, Education,
     ties: A Study of Diversity Among Men  and Welfare, August 1978
     and Women. New York, Simon &       79. Report on Smoking and Health. Rock-
     Schuster, 1978                        ville, Md, US Department of Health,
 65. Hooker E: The adjustment of the male  Education, and Welfare, Office of the
    overt homosexual, in The Problem of    Surgeon General, 1979


                          Comparative Listing of DSM-II and DSM-III 391

                              REFERENCES

80. Jaffe JH, Jarvik ME: Tobacco use and  terrors. J Nerv Ment Dis 158:174-188,
   tobacco use disorder, in Psychopharma- 1974
   cology, A Generation of Progress.  91. Fisher C, Kahn E, Edwards E, et al: A
   Edited by Lipton MA, DiMascio A,       psychophysiological study of night-
   Killam KF. New York, Raven Press,      mares and night terrors I. Physiological
   1978, pp 1665-1676                     aspects of stage 4 night terrors. J
81. Larson PS, Silvetle H: Tobacco: Ex-   Nerv Ment Dis 157:75-98, 1973
   perimental and Clinical Studies. Bal- 92. Halmi KA: Anorexia nervosa and eat-
   timore, Williams & Wilkins Co, 1975    ing disorders in Comprehensive Text-
82. Looney JG, Lipp MR, Spitzer RL: A     book of Psychiatry, 3rd ed. Edited by
   new method of classification for psy-  Kaplan H, Freedman A, Sadock B. Bal-
   chophysiologic disorders. Am J Psy-    timore, Williams & Wilkins Co, 1980
   chiatry 135:304-308, 1978
                                      93. Looney JG, Gunderson EKE: Transient
83. Latimer P: Psychophysiologic dis-     situational disturbances: course and
   orders: a critical appraisal of concept outcome. Am J Psychiatry 135:660-663,
   and theory illustrated with reference  1978
   to the irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).
                                      94. Cantwell D: The Hyperactive Child:
   Psychological Med 9:71-80, 1979
                                          Diagnosis and Management and Cur-
84. Baker L, Cantwell DP: Developmental   rent Research. New York, Halstead
   language disorder, in Comprehensive    Press, 1975
   Textbook of Psychiatry, 3rd ed. Edited
                                      95. Cantwell D: Scientific myth of minimal
   by Kaplan H, Freedman A, Sadock B.
                                          brain damage. Frontiers of Psychiatry,
   Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins Co, 1980 June 1:5-6, 1975
85. Baker L, Cantwell DP: Developmental 96. Robins L: Sturdy childhood predictors
   articulation disorder, in Comprehensive of adult outcomes: replications from
   Textbook of Psychiatry, 3rd ed. Edited longitudinal studies, Psychological
   by Kaplan H, Freedman A, Sadock B.     Med 8:611-622, 1978
   Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins Co,
   1980                               97. Kirkegaard-Sorensen L and Mednick
                                          SA: A prospective study of predictors
86. Baker L, Cantwell DP: Specific arith- of criminality: 4. school behavior, in
   metic disorders, in Comprehensive Text- Mednick S and Christiansen KO, Bio-
   book of Psychiatry, 3rd ed. Edited by  social Bases of Criminal Behavior, Hal-
   Kaplan H, Freedman A, Sadock B. Bal-   sted Press, New York, 1977, pp 255-
   timore, Williams & Wilkins Co, 1980    266
87. Rutter M, Yule W: The concept of spe- 98. Cloninger CR, Christiansen KO, Reich
   cific reading retardation. J Child Psychol T, Gottesman II: Implications of
   & Psychiatry 16:181-197, 1975          sex differences in the prevalence of
88. Rutter M, Yule W: Specific Reading    antisocial personality, alcoholism, and
   Retardation, in The First Review of    criminality for familial transmission,
   Special Education. Edited by Mann L,   Arch Gen Psychiatry 35:941-951, 1978
   Sabatino D, USA, Buttonwood Farms, 99. Jenkins RL: Behavior Disorders of
   1973                                   Childhood and Adolescence. Spring-
89. Shapiro AK, Shapiro ES, Bruun KD,     field, 111, Charles C Thomas, 1973
    et al: Gilles de la Tourette Syndrome. 100. Lewis H: Deprived Children. New
   New York, Raven Press, 1978            York, Oxford University Press, 1954,
                                          pp 63-69
90. Fisher C, Kahn E, Edwards A, et al:
   A psychophysiological study of night- 101. Wender P: Minimal Brain Dysfunction
   mares and night terrors, III: mental   in Children. New York, John Wiley &
   content and recall of stage 4 night    Sons, 1971


392 Appendix C

                              REFERENCES
102. Weiss G, Minde K, Werry JS, et al: 112. Sussman N, Hyler S: Factitious dis-
    Studies on the hyperactive child, VIII, orders, in Comprehensive Textbook of
    five year follow-up. Arch Gen Psychia- Psychiatry, 3rd ed. Edited by Kaplan H,
    try 24:409-414, 1971                   Freedman A, Sadock B. Baltimore, Wil-
103. Wood DR, Reimherr FW, Wender PH,      liams & Wilkins Co, 1980
    et al: Diagnosis and treatment of mini- 113. Kingsley HJ: Peculiarities in derma-
    mal brain dysfunction in adults. Arch  tology: a case of dermatitis artefacta.
    Gen Psychiatry 33:1453-1460, 1976      Central African J Med 13:264, 1967
104. Fischoff J: Failure to thrive, in Hand- 114. Lesieur HR: The compulsive gambler's
    book of Child Psychiatry. Edited by    spiral of options and involvement. Psy-
    Noshpitz J. New York, Basic Books (in  chiatry 42:79-87,.1979
    press)                             115. Bolen DW, Boyd WH: Gambling and
105. Lozoff B, et al: The mother-newborn   the gambler. Arch Gen Psychiatry 18:
    relationship: limits of adaptability. J 617-630, 1968
    Pediat 91:1-12, 1977               116. Wihels F: Kleptomania and other psy-
106. Elson A, Pearson C, Jones CD, et al:  chopathic crimes. J Criminal Psycho-
    Follow-up study of childhood elective  path 4:205-216, 1942
    mutism. Arch Gen Psychiatry 13:182- 117. Lewis NDC, Yarnell H: Pathological
    187, 1965                              firesetting. Monograph No. 82. New
107. Browne E, Wilson V, Layborne PC:      York, Nervous and Mental Diseases,
    Diagnosis and treatment of elective    1951
    mutism in children. J Am Acad Child 118. Bach-y-Rita G, Lion JR, Climent CE,
    Psychiatry 2:605-617, 1963             et al: Episodic dyscontrol, a study of
108. Group for the Advancement of Psy-     130 violent patients. Am J Psychiatry
    chiatry: (Report #62) Psychopatho-     127:1473-1478, 1971
    logical Disorders in Childhood. Theo- 119. Weiss JMA, David D: Malingering and
    retical Considerations and a Proposed  associated syndromes, in American
    Classification. Formulated by the Com- Handbook of Psychiatry, 2nd ed, vol
    mittee on Child Psychiatry. New York,  3. Edited by Arieti S, Caplan G. New
    GAP, 1966                              York, Basic Books, 1974, pp 270-287
109. Erikson E: Identity: Youth and Crisis. 120. Clayton PJ, Halikas JA, Maurice WL:
    New York, WW Norton, 1968              The bereavement of the widowed. Dis
110. Lichtenstein H: The Dilemma of        Nerv Syst 32: 597-604, 1971
    Human Identity. New York, J. Aronson, 121. Clayton PJ, Herjanic M, Murphy GE,
    1977                                   et al: Mourning and depression: their
111. Asher R: The Munchausen syndrome.     similarities and differences. Can Psy-
    Lancet 1:339-341, 1951                 chiatr Assoc J 19:309-312, 1974


                                Comparative Listing of DSM-II and DSM-IH 393

                           DSM-II DIAGNOSES and CODES
MENTAL RETARDATION                            293.30 Intracranial neoplasm
310. Borderline                               293.40 Degenerative disease of the
311. Mild                                              CMS
312. Moderate                                 293.50 Brain trauma
313. Severe                                   293.90 Other cerebral condition
314. Profound
315. Unspecified                              Psychosis associated with other
                                              physical condition
With each: Following or associated with       294.00 Endocrine disorder
    .00 Infection or intoxication             294.10 Metabolic or nutritional
    .10 Trauma or physical agent                      disorder
    .20 Disorders of metabolism,              294.20 Systemic infection
         growth or nutrition                  294.30 Drug or poison intoxication
    .30 Gross brain disease (postnatal)                (other than alcohol)
    .40 Unknown prenatal influence            294.40 Childbirth
    .50 Chromosomal abnormality               294.80 Other and unspecified physical
    .60 Prematurity                                    condition
    .70 Major psychiatric disorder
    .80 Psycho-social (environmental)
                                              B NON-PSYCHOTIC OBS
         deprivation
                                              309.00 Intracranial infection
    .90 Other condition
                                              309.13 Alcohol (simple drunkenness)
                                              309.14 Other drug, poison, or
ORGANIC BRAIN SYNDROMES (OBS)                         systemic intoxication
A PSYCHOSES                                   309.20 Brain trauma
Senile and pre-senile dementia                309.30 Circulatory disturbance
290.00 Senile dementia                        309.40 Epilepsy
290.10 Pre-senile dementia                    309.50 Disturbance of metabolism,
                                                       growth or nutrition
Alcoholic psychosis                           309.60 Senile or pre-senile brain
291.00 Delirium tremens                               disease
291.10 Korsakov's psychosis                   309.70 Intracranial neoplasm
291.20 Other alcoholic hallucinosis           309.80 Degenerative disease of the
291.30 Alcohol paranoid state                          CMS
291.40 Acute alcohol intoxication             309.90 Other physical condition
291.50 Alcoholic deterioration
291.60 Pathological intoxication              PSYCHOSES NOT ATTRIBUTED TO
291.90 Other alcoholic psychosis              PHYSICAL CONDITIONS LISTED
                                              PREVIOUSLY
Psychosis associated with intracranial        Schizophrenia
infection                                     295.00 Simple
292.00 General paralysis                      295.10 Hebephrenic
292.10 Syphilis of central nervous            295.20 Catatonic
         system                               295.23 Catatonic type, excited
292.20 Epidemic encephalitis                  295.24 Catatonic type, withdrawn
292.30 Other and unspecified                  295.30 Paranoid
         encephalitis                         295.40 Acute schizophrenic episode
292.90 Other intracranial infection           295.50 Latent
                                              295.60 Residual
Psychosis associated with other               295.70 Schizo-affective
cerebral condition                            295.73 Schizo-affective, excited
293.00 Cerebral arteriosclerosis              295.74 Schizo-affective, depressed
293.10 Other cerebrovascular                  295.80 Childhood
         disturbance                          295.90 Chronic undifferentiated
293.20 Epilepsy                               295.99 Other schizophrenic


394 Appendix C

Major affective disorders               302.20 Pedophilia.
296.00 Involutional melancholia         302.30 Transvestism
296.10 Manic-depressive illness, manic  302.40 Exhibitionism
296.20 Manic-depressive illness,        302.50 Voyeurism
       depressed                        302.60 Sadism
296.30 Manic-depressive illness,        302.70 Masochism
       circular                         302.80 Other sexual deviation
296.33 Manic-depressive, circular,
        manic                           Alcoholism
296.34 Manic-depressive, circular,      303.00 Episodic excessive drinking
        depressed                       303.10 Habitual excessive drinking
296.80 Other major affective disorder   303.20 Alcohol addiction
Paranoid states                         303.90 Other alcoholism
297.00 Paranoia                         Drug dependence
297.10 Involutional paranoid state      304.00 Opium, opium alkaloids and
297.90 Other paranoid state                     their derivatives
                                        304.10 Synthetic analgesics with
Other psychoses
                                                morphine-like effects
298.00 Psychotic depressive reaction
                                        304.20 Barbiturates
                                        304.30 Other hypnotics and sedatives
NEUROSES
                                                or "tranquilizers"
300.00 Anxiety
                                        304.40 Cocaine
300.10 Hysterical
                                        304.50 Cannabis sativa (hashish,
300.13 Hysterical, conversion type              marihuana)
300.14 Hysterical, dissociative type    304.60 Other psycho-stimulants
300.20 Phobic                           304.70 Hallucinogens
300.30 Obsessive compulsive
                                        304.80 Other drug dependence
300.40 Depressive
300.50 Neurasthenic
                                        PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGIC DISORDERS
300.60 Depersonalization                305.00 Skin
300.70 Hypochondriacal                  305.10 Musculoskeletal
300.80 Other neurosis                   305.20 Respiratory
                                        305.30 Cardiovascular
PERSONALITY DISORDERS AND               305.40 Hemic and lymphatic
CERTAIN OTHER NON-PSYCHOTIC
                                        305.50 Castro-intestinal
MENTAL DISORDERS
                                        305.60 Genito-urinary
Personality disorders
                                        305.70 Endocrine
301.00 Paranoid
                                        305.80 Organ of special sense
301.10 Cyclothymic
                                        305.90 Other type
301.20 Schizoid
301.30 Explosive
                                        SPECIAL SYMPTOMS
301.40 Obsessive compulsive
                                        306.00 Speech disturbance
301.50 Hysterical
                                        306.10 Specific learning disturbance
301.60 Asthenic
                                        306.20 Tic
301.70 Antisocial
                                        306.30 Other psychomotor disorder
301.81 Passive-aggressive
                                        306.40 Disorders of sleep
301.82 Inadequate
                                        306.50 Feeding disturbance
301.89 Other specified types
                                        306.60 Enuresis
Sexual deviation                        306.70 Encopresis
302.00 Homosexuality                    306.80 Cephalalgia
302.10 Fetishism                        306.90 Other special symptom


                                Comparative Listing of DSM-II and DSM-III 395

TRANSIENT SITUATIONAL                         CONDITIONS WITHOUT MANIFEST
DISTURBANCES                                  PSYCHIATRIC DISORDER AND
307.00 Adjustment reaction of infancy         NON-SPECIFIC CONDITIONS
307.10 Adjustment reaction of                 Social maladjustment without manifest
         childhood                            psychiatric disorder
307.20 Adjustment reaction of                 316.00 Marital maladjustment
         adolescence                          316.10 Social maladjustment
307.30 Adjustment reaction of adult           316.20 Occupational maladjustment
         life                                 316.30 Dyssocial behavior
307.40 Adjustment reaction of late life       316.90 Other social maladjustment
                                              Non-specific conditions
BEHAVIOR DISORDERS OF CHILD-                  317.00 Non-specific conditions
 HOOD AND ADOLESCENCE
308.00 Hyperkinetic reaction                  No mental disorder
308.10 Withdrawing reaction                   318.00 No mental disorder
 308.20 Overanxious reaction
                                              NON-DIAGNOSTIC TERMS FOR
308.30 Runaway reaction                       ADMINISTRATIVE USE
 308.40 Unsocialized aggressive               319.00 Diagnosis deferred
         reaction                             319.10 Boarder
308.50 Group delinquent reaction              319.20 Experiment only
 308.90 Other reaction                        319.90 Other


This page intentionally left blank 


           Appendix D


  Historical Review, and
Mental Disorders Sections
 of ICD-9 and ICD-9-CM


This page intentionally left blank 


                                                  -Atrripfirii'f S.L/ J/d.tM.J.YA THt-r »*
     Historical Review, and Mental
 Disorders Sections of ICD-9 and

                                              Km m ^^^T*** 1 ^tf I
                                             T/TJL ^w* JlLfttf' )Jf  Q^WM * J, ¥pm JL r


                      HISTORICAL REVIEW*

    This historical review covers the activities of the World Health Organiza-
tion (WHO) in developing the classification of mental disorders (Section V) of
the Ninth Revision of the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-9), and
some of the major changes from ICD-8. In addition, the clinical modification of
ICD-9 (ICD-9-CM) that was introduced in the United States, and the relation-
ship between it and the DSM-III classification are discussed.


                    Purposes and Uses of the ICD

    The ICD is a statistical classification not only of mental disorders but of
diseases and other morbid conditions; complications of pregnancy, childbirth,
and the puerperium; congenital abnormalities; causes of perinatal morbidity and
mortality; accidents, poisonings, and violence; and symptoms, signs, and ill-
defined conditions. Its principal use is in the classification of morbidity and
mortality information for statistical purposes, as the unabridged title of the
classification makes quite clear: The International Statistical Classification of
Diseases, Injuries, and Causes of Death.
    The ICD has also been adapted for use as a nomenclature of diseases for
indexing medical records. The basic purpose of such indexing is to facilitate re-
trieval of medical records for a variety of purposes (for example, studies of
management of patients with specific conditions; follow-up studies of patients
with specific diseases who have undergone various operative and therapeutic
procedures). Its limitations for these purposes led to the development of the
ICD-9-CM in the United States-—a subject to be discussed below.
    It is essential to keep in mind that the ICD is a statistical classification of
diseases, not a nomenclature of diseases. The distinction between these two is
important. A nomenclature of diseases is a list or catalogue of approved terms
for describing and recording clinical and pathological observations. To serve its
full function it must be sufficiently extensive so that any pathological condition
can be accurately recorded. As medical science advances, a nomenclature must
expand to include the new terms necessary to record new observations. In con-
trast, a statistical classification indicates the relationship between diagnostic

* Prepared by Morton Kramer, Sc.D.

                                399


400 Appendix D

 categories and must be confined to a limited number of categories that encom-
pass the entire range of diseases and morbid conditions.

                  Organizational Arrangement of ICD-9

    The ICD is organized into 17 major sections, each of which is devoted to a
 specific set of conditions (Table 1). Each of these major sections is subdivided
into a defined set of categories, each identified by three digits ranging from 001
to 999. To provide greater detail, each such category is further divided into ad-
ditional subcategories by a fourth digit (.0 to .9). Table 1 shows the number of
three-digit categories allotted to each major section. Only 30 are allotted to
 mental disorders, so that all mental disorders must be classified within these
 30 categories and their fourth-digit subdivisions.
    The structure of the classification is such that the axes of classification are
 not consistent within each of the 17 major sections. In some of these categories
 (e.g., diseases of the respiratory system) the primary axis is topographical; less
frequently it is etiological (e.g., infectious diseases) or situational (e.g., complica-
 tions of pregnancy). In other sections, still other primary axes are used, re-
 flecting the fact that the ICD provides a pragmatic classification that can be
used for a variety of purposes.
    There are also two supplementary chapters: one for classification of ex-
ternal causes of injury and poisoning (the E codes), and the other for classifica-
tion of factors influencing health status and contact with health services (the
 V codes). Both of these classifications contain items of relevance to agencies
 and facilities that provide mental health services.

                         Revisions of the ICD

    The ICD is revised regularly, at approximately ten-year intervals. This
pattern was initiated with the First Revision Conference of the International List
 of Causes of Death, held in Paris in 1900. The original classification, as indicated
 by its title, was used solely for coding causes of death, and did not provide a
 separate section for the mental disorders until the Fifth Revision of that List
 (1938). In that Revision, mental disorders were assigned only a single three-
 digit rubric with four subcategories within the section on Diseases of the
Nervous System and Sense Organs: (a) mental deficiency; (b) schizophrenia;
 (c) manic depressive psychosis; and (d) all other mental disorders. The Con-
 ference for the Sixth Revision (1948) expanded the classification for use not
 only for causes of death but also for causes of morbidity. ICD-6 contained the
 first separate section on mental disorders (Section V). No major revisions were
 made in that section in ICD-7 (1955).
    The international community of psychiatrists expressed considerable dis-
 satisfaction with the classification of mental disorders in ICD-6 and ICD-7;
 consequently, it was not widely used (Stengel, 1959). As the importance of
 mental disorders as an international public health problem became more widely


                                        Historical Review, ICD-9 401

                              Table 1

Distribution of the 3-Digit Categories of the ICD-9 by the Number of Digits
Allocated to Each Category

                                              Digits      Number
                                             allocated   of 3-digit
            Major 3-digit categories        to category  categories
    I Infectious and Parasitic Diseases 001-139             139
   II Neoplasms 140-239                                     100
   III Endocrine, Nutritional, and
        Metabolic Disorders 240-279                          40
  IV Diseases of Blood and
        Blood-forming Organs 280-289                         10
   V Mental Disorders 290-319                                30
  VI Diseases of the Nervous
        System and Sense Organs 320-389                      70
  VII Diseases of the Circulatory System 390-459             70
 VIII Diseases of the Respiratory System 460-519             60
  IX Diseases of the Digestive System 520-579                60
   X Diseases of the Genito-urinary System   580-629         50
   XI Complications of Pregnancy,
        Childbirth, and Puerperium 630-679                   50
  XII Diseases of the Skin and
        Subcutaneous Tissue 680-709                          30
 XIII Diseases of the Musculoskeletal
        System and Connective Tissue 710-739                 30
 XIV Congenital Abnormalities 740-759                        20
  XV Certain Conditions Originating
        in the Prenatal Period 760-779                       20
 XVI Symptoms, Signs, and Ill-defined
        Conditions 780-799                                   20
 XVII Injury and Poisoning 800-999                          200
                                             TOTAL          999

 recognized, the need for an internationally acceptable classification of mental
 disorders became increasingly urgent. Accordingly, the World Health Orga-
 nization developed an active program for revising the content and form of that
 classification to reflect new knowledge of the differential characteristics of
 specific mental disorders and their diagnosis and treatment to meet the in-
 creasing needs of health and social agencies, research workers, and users of
 health statistics for more detailed statistical and epidemiological data on mental
 disorders. The mental disorders chapter of ICD-8, adopted in 1965, reflected
 these changes (WHO, 1969).
     To achieve more uniform usage of the terms in the mental disorders
 classification of ICD-8, WHO convened a working group of experts from dif-


402 Appendix D

ferent countries for the purpose of preparing a Glossary of Mental Disorders
and Guide to Their Classification for use in conjunction with ICD-8 (WHO,
1974). The main aim of this glossary was:
    to ensure as far as possible that those who apply it will arrive at a uniform
    use of the principal diagnostic terms current in psychiatry. In addition to
    helping to minimize the discrepancies among the diagnostic concepts used
    by psychiatrists in different countries for the statistical reporting of mental
    illness, use of the Glossary in publications dealing with either clinical work
    or research will also assist psychiatrists from different countries and schools
    of thought in understanding each other's work and concepts.

                      The Ninth Revision of ICD

    To develop revision proposals for ICD-9, WHO initiated an intensive pro-
gram to obtain information on problems encountered by psychiatrists in dif-
ferent countries in the use of the mental disorders section of ICD-8 and to
formulate recommendations for their solutions (Shepherd, et al, 1968). This pro-
gram resulted in the classification of mental disorders that appears in ICD-9,
adopted by the World Health Assembly in 1975 (WHO, 1977).
    As stated by WHO (1978):
        Changes and new categories in the International Classification of Dis-
    eases (ICD-9) have been introduced only for sound reasons and after
    much consideration. As far as possible, the changes in Chapter V (ICD-9)
    have been based upon evidence that the new codes function better than
    the old ones. Some of this evidence, and a large proportion of other changes
    based upon discussion and consideration of different viewpoints, emanated
    from the World Health Organization's program on the standardization of
    psychiatric diagnosis, classification and statistics. A central feature of this
    program was a series of eight international seminars held annually be-
    tween 1965 and 1972, each of which focused upon a recognized problem
    area in psychiatric diagnosis. Psychiatrists from more than 40 countries
    participated, and the documents and proposals that were used to produce
    the recommendations for ICD-9 in the eighth and final seminar were seen
    and commented upon by many more.
    The first seven of the seminars focused on the classification of major
groups of psychiatric disorders, and the last seminar on program review.
    Dr. Jack Ewalt, past President of the American Psychiatric Association, and
Dr. Henry Brill, former Chairman of the APA Task Force on Nomenclature and
Statistics, played active roles in these seminars and in the development of the
final classification of mental disorders of ICD-9. Other members of the Asso-
ciation who participated in and made important contributions to the recom-
mendations developed in several of the seminars included: Dr. Leon Eisenberg
(disorders of childhood) and Drs. George Tarjan, Julius Richmond, and J. Wortis
(mental retardation) (WHO, 1970, 1971, 1972, 1973).


                                        Historical Review, ICD-9 403

    Place Year                             Subject

London 1965                Functional psychoses, with emphasis on schizo-
                             phrenia
Oslo 1966                 Borderline psychosis, reactive psychosis
Paris 1967                 Psychiatric disorders of childhood
Moscow 1968                Mental disorders of old age
Washington, DC 1969        Mental retardation
Basle 1970                 Neurotic and psychosomatic disorders
Tokyo 1971                 Personality disorders and drug addiction
Geneva 1972                Summary, conclusions, recommendations, and
                             proposals for further research

                  WHO Glossary of Mental Disorders

    A major innovation of the mental disorders section of ICD-9 is the in-
corporation of a glossary as an integral part of that section. It is the only section
of ICD-9 that contains such a glossary. The reason for this, as stated by WHO,
is as follows (WHO, 1977a):

        This section of the Classification differs from the others in that it
    includes a glossary, prepared after consultation with experts from many
    different countries, defining the contents of the rubrics. This difference is
    considered to be justified because of the special problems posed for
    psychiatrists by the relative lack of independent laboratory information
    upon which to base their diagnoses. The diagnosis of many of the most
    important mental disorders still relies largely upon descriptions of abnormal
    experience and behaviour, and without some guidance in the form of a
    glossary that can serve as a common frame of reference, psychiatric com-
    munications easily became unsatisfactory at both clinical and statistical
    levels.
        Many well-known terms have different meanings in current use, and
    it is important for the user to use the glossary descriptions and not merely
    the category titles when searching for the best fit for the condition he is
    trying to code. This is particularly important if a separate national glossary
    also exists.

   Differences between the Mental Disorders Sections of ICD-8 and ICD-9

    Table 2 provides a comparison of the three-digit categories of mental dis-
orders in ICD-8 and ICD-9.


 404 Appendix D

                                       Table 2
     Comparison of ICD-8 and ICD-9 3-Digit Categories of Mental Disorders
                 ICD-8 ICD-9
PSYCHOSES (290-299) ORGANIC PSYCHOTIC CONDITIONS (290-294)
                                               290 Senile and presenile organic psy-
 290 Senile and presenile dementia
                                                      chotic conditions
 291 Alcoholic psychosis
                                               291 Alcoholic psychoses
 292 Psychosis associated with intra-
                                               292 Drug psychoses
        cranial infection
                                               293 Transient organic psychotic condi-
 293 Psychosis associated with other cere-
                                                      tions
        bral condition
                                               294 Other organic psychotic conditions
 294 Psychosis associated with other
                                                      (chronic)
        physical condition
                                              OTHER PSYCHOSES (295-299)
 295 Schizophrenia
                                               295 Schizophrenic psychoses
 296 Affective psychoses
                                               296 Affective psychoses
 297 Paranoid states
                                               297  Paranoid states
 298 Other psychoses
                                               298  Other nonorganic psychoses
 299 Unspecified psychosis
                                              *299  Psychoses with origin specific to
                                                      childhood
NEUROSES, PERSONALITY DISORDERS AND           NEUROTIC DISORDERS, PERSONALITY DISORDERS
OTHER NONPSYCHOTIC MENTAL DISORDERS           AND OTHER NONPSYCHOTIC MENTAL DISORDERS
(300-309)                                     (300-316)
                                               300 Neurotic disorders
 300 Neuroses                                  301 Personality disorders
 301 Personality disorders                     302 Sexual deviations and disorders
 302 Sexual deviations                         303 Alcohol dependence syndrome
 303 Alcoholism                                304 Drug dependence
 304 Drug dependence                          *305 Nondependent abuse of drugs
 305 Physical disorders of presumably          306 Physiological malfunction arising
        psychogenic origin                            from mental factors
 306 Special symptoms not elsewhere            307 Special symptoms or syndromes not
        classified                                    elsewhere classified
 307 Transient situational disturbances       *308 Acute reaction to stress
 308 Behavior disorders of childhood          *309 Adjustment reaction
 309 Mental disorders not specified as         310 Specific nonpsychotic mental dis-
        psychotic associated with physical            orders following organic brain
        conditions                                    damage
                                              *311 Depressive disorder, not elsewhere
                                                      classified
                                              *312 Disturbance of conduct not elsewhere
                                                      classified
                                              *313 Disturbance of emotions specific to
                                                      childhood and adolescence
MENTAL RETARDATION (310-315)                  *314 Hyperkinetic syndrome of childhood
                                              *315 Specific delays in development
 310 Borderline mental retardation            *316 Psychic factors associated with dis-
 311 Mild mental retardation                          eases classified elsewhere
 312 Moderate mental retardation              MENTAL RETARDATION (317-319)
 313 Severe mental retardation                 317 Mild mental retardation
 314 Profound mental retardation               318 Other specified mental retardation
 315 Unspecified mental retardation            319 Unspecified mental retardation
Adapted from: World Health Organization (1978) Mental Disorders: Glossary and Guide to Their
Classification in Accordance with the Ninth Revision of the International Classification of Diseases,
Geneva, WHO, 1978.
* New categories in ICD-9 that were not in ICD-8


                                        Historical Review, ICD-9 405

  The classification of the following disorders was thoroughly recast in ICD-9:
                      Disorder ICD-9 Codes
Affective psychoses 296
Organic mental disorders 290, 293, 294
Acute reaction to stress 308
Adjustment reaction 309
Specific nonpsychotic mental disorder following
  organic brain damage 310
Disturbance of conduct, not elsewhere classified 312
Disturbance of emotions specific to childhood
  and adolescence 313
Hyperkinetic syndrome of childhood 314
Specific delays in development 315
Alcohol disorders 291, 303, 305
Drug disorders 292, 304, 305

Several new three-digit categories were also added:
    299 Psychoses with origin specific to childhood
    305 Nondependent abuse of drugs
    308 Acute reaction to stress
    309 Adjustment reaction
    311 Depressive disorder, not elsewhere classified
    312 Disturbance of conduct, not elsewhere classified
    313 Disturbance of emotions specific to childhood and adolescence
    314 Hyperkinetic syndrome of childhood
    315 Specific delays in development
    316 Psychic factors associated with diseases classified elsewhere

           Elimination of Combination Categories from ICD-9

    ICD-9 also differs from ICD-8 in that it does not include so-called "com-
bination categories," for coding combined mental and physical disorders such as
organic mental disorders and mental retardation. To illustrate, in certain in-
stances an ICD-8 category designated a mental disorder associated with a
specific physical condition (e.g., psychosis with cerebral arteriosclerosis); in
other instances, the category consisted of a specified mental condition and a
general class of associated physical disorders (e.g., moderate mental retardation
following infections and intoxications). "Combination categories" such as these
have been eliminated from ICD-9 and replaced by categories that require cod-
ing on two independent axes. Thus, a psychotic condition arising from a physi-
cal disorder would be classified by using two code numbers: one for the mental
disorder, and one for the underlying physical disorder. The following are
categories in which multiple coding is necessary:


406 Appendix D

                        Disorder ICD-9 Codes
Senile and presenile organic psychotic conditions 290
Transient organic psychotic conditions 293
Other organic psychotic conditions (chronic) 294
Specific nonpsychotic mental disorder following organic brain
  damage 310
 Physiological malfunction arising from mental factors 306
Psychic factors associated with diseases classified elsewhere 316
Mental retardation 317 — 319

    The use of the second code will require the clinician to familiarize himself
 or herself with all of the sections of the ICD and its alphabetical index (WHO,
 1977a,b). This index assists in locating the code number for the associated
 condition.

                        Multiaxial Classification

     The concept of a multiaxial classification system for mental disorders was
 first proposed at the WHO seminar on the mental disorders of childhood, in
 Paris in 1967 (Rutter et al, 1969). The condition of the child was to be re-
 corded on three axes: clinical syndrome, intellectual level, and etiologic factors.
 Two years later, during the seminar in Washington on the problems of classi-
 fication of mental retardation, another axis was suggested for coding associated
 social and cultural factors (Tarjan et al., 1972).
     WHO has initiated a number of international studies to obtain empirical
 data about the usefulness of the multiaxial classification. In one of these, carried
 out in the United Kingdom and involving a large number of child psychiatrists,
 a series of patients were assessed using both the triaxial approach and the
 ICD. Case histories were also used to assess the agreement between psychia-
 trists using these two classificatory systems. The results of this study clearly
 demonstrated that a multiaxial classification system can be used, and that it
 provides more and better data about the patients seen and assessed (Rutter
 et al., 1975). This study has now been expanded, and psychiatrists from several
 European countries are participating. Similar studies are about to begin in
 other countries. Some of these are concerned with the classification of disorders
 in old age, and others with the classification of mental disorders in criminals.

                        Other Details of ICD-9

     The interested reader will find more details on the development of the ICD-
 9 Classification of Mental Disorders and its content in Mental Disorders: Glos-
 sary and Guide to Their Classification in accordance with the Ninth Revision
 of the ICD (WHO, 1978), and a review of other highlights in a paper by Kramer
 et al. (1979).


                                        Historical Review, ICD-9 407

  International Classification of Diseases, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM)

    As stated earlier, the ICD is primarily a classification of diseases for use in
coding morbidity and mortality data for statistical purposes, and it has been
adapted for use in clinical situations for the indexing of hospital records by
disease and procedure (H-ICD-A). However, in the United States, clinicians and
 others responsible for the care of patients found they needed a classification
 with more specificity than that provided by ICD-9. Accordingly, the National
 Center for Health Statistics convened during 1977 a steering committee to advise
 the Council on Clinical Classifications on how to modify ICD-9 to satisfy this
 need. This Council was sponsored by the following organizations: American
 Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
 American College of Physicians, American College of Surgeons, American
 Psychiatric Association, and Commission on Professional and Hospital Activities.
 The task forces on classification of these organizations provided clinical guidance
 and technical input to the development of ICD-9-CM, the Clinical Modification
 of the World Health Organization's International Classification of Diseases,
 9th Revision. As stated in the introduction to ICD-9-CM (1978):

        The term 'clinical' is used to emphasize the modification's intent: to
     serve as a useful tool in the area of classification of morbidity data for in-
     dexing of medical records, medical care review, and ambulatory and other
     medical care programs, as well as for basic health statistics. To describe the
     clinical picture of the patient, the codes must be more precise than those
     needed only for statistical groupings and trends analysis.

     ICD-9-CM is compatible with its parent system, ICD-9, thus meeting the
 need for comparability of morbidity and mortality statistics at the international
 level. This was accomplished by: (a) keeping the contents and the sequence of
 the three-digit rubrics of ICD-9 unchanged; (b) not adding new three-digit
 rubrics to the main body of the classification; (c) adding a fifth digit to the exist-
 ing ICD-9 rubrics; and (d) creating a few four-digit codes in existing three-digit
 rubrics only when the necessary detail could not be accommodated by the use of
 a fifth-digit subclassification.
     As of the time when WHO had essentially completed its work on ICD-9,
 the American Psychiatric Association's Task Force on Nomenclature and Sta-
 tistics was still in the midst of preparing the third edition of its Diagnostic and
 Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-III). As a result, it was not pos-
 sible to have revised diagnostic terms submitted in time for inclusion in ICD-9.
 However, the Chair of this APA Task Force was invited by the Council on
 Clinical Classifications to submit for inclusion in ICD-9-CM, those DSM-III
 terms not included in ICD-9. After ICD-9-CM went into effect on 1 January
 1979, further changes were made in the still evolving DSM-III classification.
 All of the terms in the final DSM-III classification are either included in the
 ICD-9-CM volume itself or published as addenda to the ICD-9-CM in issues of


408 Appendix D

Medical Record News as recommended terms or inclusion terms (acceptable as
alternative terms).*
    The classification of affective psychoses in ICD-9-CM (code 296) departs
considerably from that in ICD-9. It is important for the users of this category to
be aware of the fact that, in some instances, the same four-digit code numbers
refer to different conditions in ICD-9 and ICD-9-CM. For example, the code
296.2 in ICD-9 is "Manic depressive psychoses, circular type but currently
manic," whereas in ICD-9-CM, the same code is used for "Major Depressive
Disorder, Single Episode."
    It should also be noted that following the practice of ICD-9, "combination
codes" are not included in ICD-9-CM. Therefore, it is important for clinicians
and others using ICD-9-CM to become acquainted with codes for other diseases
and other conditions that are to be entered on Axis III of the DSM-III classifica-
tion (for Physical Disorders and Conditions).

                             Summary

    The International Classification of Diseases (ICD) is an essential tool for
the collection and dissemination of comparable mortality and morbidity data
throughout the world. Mental disorders have been assigned an increasingly
prominent place in the ICD; and the proposals for their classification in the
9th Revision, which became effective as of I January 1979, have been formu-
lated on the basis of an extensive WHO program involving a series of seminars
and consultations with leading mental health experts in many countries.
    An accompanying glossary and guide to the classification rubrics for the
mental disorders were developed for the first time in connection with the 8th
Revision. A major innovation in the 9th Revision is the incorporation of the
glossary within the text of the section on mental disorders.
    The new elements in the ICD-9 section on mental disorders include thor-
oughly recast rubrics for several categories, including affective disorders and
psychiatric conditions specific to childhood. The "combination categories" for
coding associations between mental and physical disorders are eliminated and
replaced by categories requiring independent coding.
    The next revision of the ICD will have to take into account a variety of
needs that have emerged since the publication of ICD-9. These include: multi-
axial classification methods, classification of disabilities, adaptation of the ICD
for use in primary health care, and standardization of medical nomenclature
on multilingual bases.
    A major development in the United States was the preparation of the ICD-9-
CM (Clinical Modification) to provide the additional specificity required by
clinicians, research workers, epidemiologists, program planners, medical record
librarians, and administrators of inpatient, outpatient, and community programs.
    The experiences derived from the use of ICD-9, ICD-9-CM, and DSM-III
in the United States will be invaluable for those who will participate in the
development of ICD-10.

* Mr. Robert Seeman, Chief Nosologist, Council on Clinical Classifications, provided invaluable con-
sultation that helped achieve compatibility between the DSM-III and ICD-9-CM classifications.


                                             Historical Review, ICD-9 409

                              REFERENCES*

World Health Organization: Manual of the World Health Organization: Report of the
International List of Causes of Death, 5th Sixth Seminar of Standardization of Psychi-
revision, and Manual of Joint Causes of atric Diagnosis, Classification, and Statistics.
Death, 4th ed. Geneva, WHO, 1939       Geneva, WHO, 1971
World Health Organization: Manual of the World Health Organization: Fifth WHO
International Statistical Classification of Dis- seminar on the standardization of psychiatric
eases, Injuries, and Causes of Death, 6th re- diagnosis, classification and statistics. Am J
vision, Vol 1. Geneva, WHO, 1948       Psychiatry 128 (May Suppl) :3-14, 1972
World Health Organization: Manual of the World Health Organization: Report of the
International Statistical Classification of Dis- eighth seminar on the standardization of psy-
eases, Injuries, and Causes of Death, 7th re- chiatric diagnosis, classification, and statis-
vision, Vol 1. Geneva, WHO, 1955       tics. Geneva, WHO, 1973
Stengel, E: Classification of mental disorders. World Health Organization: Mental Disor-
Bull World Health Organization 21:601-603, ders: Glossary and Guide to Their Classifica-
1960                                   tion in Accordance with the Ninth Revision
World Health Organization: Manual of the of the International Classification of Dis-
International Statistical Classification of Dis- eases. Geneva, WHO, 1978
eases, Injuries, and Causes of Death, 8th re- Rutter M, et al: A tri-axial classification of
vision, Vol 1. Geneva, WHO, 1969       mental disorder in childhood. J Child Psychol
World Health Organization: Glossary of & Psychiatry 10:41-61, 1969
Mental Disorders and Guide to Their Classi-
fication for Use in Conjunction with the In- Tarjan G, Eisenberg L: Some thoughts on
                                       the classification of mental retardation in the
ternational Classification of Diseases, 8th re-
vision. Geneva, WHO, 1974              United States of America. Am J Psychiatry
                                       128(May suppl) :14-18, 1972
Shepherd M, et al: An experimental ap-
proach to psychiatric diagnosis: an interna- Rutter M, et al: A Multi-axial Classification
tional study. Acta Psychiat Scand, 44:Suppl of Child Psychiatric Disorders: An Evalua-
201, 1968                              tion of a Proposal. Geneva, World Health
                                       Organization, 1975
World Health Organization: Manual of the
International Statistical Classification of Dis- Kramer M, et al: The ICD-9 classification of
eases, Injuries, and Causes of Death, 9th re- mental disorders: a review of its development
vision, Vol 1. Geneva, WHO, 1977       and contents. Acta Psychiat Scand, 59:241-
                                       262, 1979
World Health Organization: Manual of the
International Statistical Classification of Dis- Commission on Professional and Hospital
eases, Injuries, and Causes of Death, 9th re- Activities: The International Classification of
vision, Vol 2, (Alphabetical Index). Geneva, Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical Modification.
WHO, 1977                              Ann Arbor, Mich., Commission on Profes-
World Health Organization: Fourth Seminar sional and Hospital Activities, 1978
on Standardization of Psychiatric Diagnosis, American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic
Classification, and Statistics. Geneva, WHO, and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
1970                                   2nd ed. Washington, D.C., APA, 1968

* A list of published material and reports is available from the World Health Organization upon
request.


410 Appendix D

       OFFPRINT OF MENTAL DISORDERS CHAPTER OF ICD-9
From Mental Disorders: Glossary and Guide to Their Classification in Accord-
ance with the Ninth Revision of the International Classification of Diseases,
World Health Organization, Geneva, 1978

This section of the Classification differs from the others in that it includes a glossary, pre-
pared after consultation with experts from many different countries, defining the content
of the rubrics. This difference is considered to be justified because of the special problems
posed for psychiatrists by the relative lack of independent laboratory information upon
which to base their diagnoses. The diagnosis of many of the most important mental dis-
orders still relies largely upon descriptions of abnormal experience and behaviour, and
without some guidance in the form of a glossary that can serve as a common frame of
reference, psychiatric communications easily become unsatisfactory at both clinical and
statistical levels.

Many well-known terms have different meanings in current use, and it is important for the
user to use the glossary descriptions and not merely the category titles when searching for
the best fit for the condition he is trying to code. This is particularly important if a separate
national glossary also exists.

The instructions "Use additional code to identify . . ." are important because of the nature
of many psychiatric conditions in which two or more codes are necessary to describe the
condition and the associated or causal factors. It should be used whenever possible.

In cases where no other information is available except that a mental disorder is present,
the code V40.9 (unspecified mental or behavioural problems) can be used.

                            PSYCHOSES (290-299)

Mental disorders in which impairment of mental function has developed to a degree that
interferes grossly with insight, ability to meet some ordinary demands of life or to main-
tain adequate contact with reality. It is not an exact or well defined term. Mental retarda-
tion is excluded.

                  ORGANIC PSYCHOTIC CONDITIONS (290-294)

Syndromes in which there is impairment of orientation, memory, comprehension, calculation,
learning capacity and judgement. These are the essential features but there may also be
shallowness or lability of affect, or a more persistent disturbance of mood, lowering of
ethical standards and exaggeration or emergence of personality traits, and diminished capac-
ity for independent decision.

Psychoses of the types classifiable to 295-298 and without the above features are excluded
even though they may be associated with organic conditions.

The term 'dementia' in this glossary includes organic psychoses as just specified, of a
chronic or progressive nature, which if untreated are usually irreversible and terminal.

The term 'delirium' in this glossary includes organic psychoses with a short course in which
the above features are overshadowed by clouded consciousness, confusion, disorientation,
delusions, illusions and often vivid hallucinations.


                                        Historical Review, ICD-9 411

Includes: psychotic organic brain syndrome

Excludes: nonpsychotic syndromes of organic aetiology (see 310.-)
          psychoses classifiable to 295-298 and without the above features but
              associated with physical disease, injury or condition affecting
              the brain [e.g., following childbirth]; code to 295-298 and use
              additional code to identify the associated physical condition

290 Senile and presenile organic psychotic conditions

Excludes: psychoses classifiable to 295-298.8 occurring in the senium without
              dementia or delirium (295-298)
          transient organic psychotic conditions (293.-)
          dementia not classified as senile, presenile, or arteriosclerotic (294.1)

290.0 Senile dementia, simple type
Dementia occurring usually after the age of 65 in which any cerebral pathology other than
that of senile atrophic change can be reasonably excluded.
Excludes: mild memory disturbances, not amounting to dementia, associated
              with senile brain disease (310.1)
          senile dementia:
            depressed or paranoid type (290.2)
            with confusion and/or delirium (290.3)

290.1 Presenile dementia
Dementia occurring usually before the age of 65 in patients with the relatively rare forms
of diffuse or lobar cerebral atrophy. Use additional code to identify the associated neuro-
logical condition.
Brain syndrome with presenile brain disease
Circumscribed atrophy of the brain
Dementia in:
  Alzheimer's disease
  Pick's disease of the brain
Excludes: arteriosclerotic dementia (290.4)
          dementia associated with other cerebral conditions (294.1)

290.2 Senile dementia, depressed or paranoid type
A type of senile dementia characterized by development in advanced old age, progressive
in nature, in which a variety of delusions and hallucinations of a persecutory, depressive and
somatic content are also present. Disturbance of the sleep/waking cycle and preoccupation
with dead people are often particularly prominent.
Senile psychosis NOS
Excludes: senile dementia:
            with confusion and/or delirium (290.3)
            NOS (290.0)


412 Appendix D

290.3 Senile dementia with acute confusional state

Senile dementia with a superimposed reversible episode of acute confusional
     state

Excludes: senile:
               dementia NOS (290.0)
               psychosis NOS (290.2)

290.4 Arteriosclerotic dementia
Dementia attributable, because of physical signs [on examination of the central nervous
system] to degenerative arterial disease of the brain. Symptoms suggesting a focal lesion in
the brain are common. There may be a fluctuating or patchy intellectual defect with insight,
and an intermittent course is common. Clinical differentiation from senile or presenile
dementia, which may coexist with it, may be very difficult or impossible. Use additional
code to identify cerebral atherosclerosis (437.0).

Excludes: suspected cases with no clear evidence of arteriosclerosis (290.9)

290.8 Other

290.9 Unspecified


291 Alcoholic psychoses

Organic psychotic states due mainly to excessive consumption of alcohol; defects of nutri-
tion are thought to play an important role. In some of these states, withdrawal of alcohol
can be of aetiological significance.

Excludes: alcoholism without psychosis (303)

291.0 Delirium tremens

Acute or subacute organic psychotic states in alcoholics, characterized by clouded conscious-
ness, disorientation, fear, illusions, delusions, hallucinations of any kind, notably visual and
tactile, and restlessness, tremor and sometimes fever.
Alcoholic delirium

291.1 Korsakov's psychosis, alcoholic

A syndrome of prominent and lasting reduction of memory span, including striking loss of
recent memory, disordered time appreciation and confabulation, occurring in alcoholics as
the sequel to an acute alcoholic psychosis [especially delirium tremens] or, more rarely, in
the course of chronic alcoholism. It is usually accompanied by peripheral neuritis and may
be associated with Wernicke's encephalopathy.

Alcoholic polyneuritic psychosis

Excludes: Korsakov's psychosis:
               NOS (294.0)
               nonalcoholic (294.0)


                                                   Historical Review, ICD-9 413

291.2 Other alcoholic dementia
Nonhallucinatory dementias occurring in association with alcoholism but not characterized
by the features of either delirium tremens or Korsakov's psychosis.
Alcoholic dementia NOS
Chronic alcoholic brain syndrome

291.3 Other alcoholic hallucinosis
A psychosis usually of less than six months' duration, with slight or no clouding of con-
sciousness and much anxious restlessness in which auditory hallucinations, mostly of voices
uttering insults and threats, predominate.
Excludes: schizophrenia (295.-) and paranoid states (297.-) taking the form
                  of chronic hallucinosis with clear consciousness in an alcoholic

291.4 Pathological drunkenness
Acute psychotic episodes induced by relatively small amounts of alcohol. These are regarded
as individual idiosyncratic reactions to alcohol, not due to excessive consumption and with-
out conspicuous neurological signs of intoxication.

Excludes: simple drunkenness (305.0)

291.5 Alcoholic jealousy
Chronic paranoid psychosis characterized by delusional jealously and associated with
alcoholism.

Alcoholic paranoia

Excludes: nonalcoholic paranoid states (297.-)
            schizophrenia, paranoid type (295.3)

291.8 Other

Alcoholic withdrawal syndrome

Excludes: delirium tremens (291.0)

291.9 Unspecified

Alcoholic:
  mania NOS
  psychosis NOS
Alcoholism (chronic) with psychosis

292 Drug psychoses

Syndromes that do not fit the descriptions given in 295-298 (nonorganic psychoses) and
which are due to consumption of drugs [notably amphetamines, barbiturates and the opiate
and LSD groups] and solvents. Some of the syndromes in this group are not as severe as
most conditions labelled "psychotic" but they are included here for practical reasons. Use
additional E Code to identify the drug and also code drug dependence (304.—) if present.


414 Appendix D

292.0 Drug withdrawal syndrome
States associated with drug withdrawal ranging from severe, as specified for alcohol under
291.0 (delirium tremens) to less severe characterized by one or more symptoms such as
convulsions, tremor, anxiety, restlessness, gastrointestinal and muscular complaints, and
mild disorientation and memory disturbance.

292.1 Paranoid and/or hallucinatory states induced by drugs
States of more than a few days but not usually of more than a few months duration, asso-
ciated with large or prolonged intake of drugs, notably of the amphetamine and LSD groups.
Auditory hallucinations usually predominate, and there may be anxiety and restlessness.
Excludes: the described conditions with confusion or delirium (293.-)
           states following LSD or other hallucinogens, lasting only a few days
               or less ["bad trips"] (305.3)

292.2 Pathological drug intoxication
Individual idiosyncratic reactions to comparatively small quantities of a drug, which take
the form of acute, brief psychotic states of any type.
Excludes: physiological side-effects of drugs [e.g., dystonias]
           expected brief psychotic reactions to hallucinogens ["bad trips"]
                (305.3)

292.8 Other
292.9 Unspecified

293 Transient organic psychotic conditions
States characterized by clouded consciousness, confusion, disorientation, illusions and often
vivid hallucinations. They are usually due to some intra- or extracerebral toxic, infectious,
metabolic or other systemic disturbance and are generally reversible. Depressive and
paranoid symptoms may also be present but are not the main feature. Use additional code
to identify the associated physical or neurological condition.
Excludes: confusional state or delirium superimposed on senile dementia
                (290.3)
           dementia due to:
             alcohol (291.-)
             arteriosclerosis (290.4)
             senility (290.0)

293.0 Acute confusional state
Short-lived states, lasting hours or days, of the above type.
Acute: Acute:
  delirium psycho-organic syndrome
  infective psychosis psychosis associated with endo-
  organic reaction crine, metabolic or cerebro-
  post-traumatic organic vascular disorder
       psychosis Epileptic:
                                     confusional state
                                     twilight state


                                             Historical Review, ICD-9 415

293.1 Subacute confusional state
 States of the above type in which the symptoms, usually less florid, last for several weeks
 or longer, during which they may show marked fluctuations in intensity.
 Subacute: Subacute:
   delirium psycho-organic syndrome
   infective psychosis psychosis associated with endo-
   organic reaction crine or metabolic disorder
   post-traumatic organic psychosis

 293.8 Other
293.9 Unspecified

294 Other organic psychotic conditions (chronic)
294.0 Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome (nonalcoholic)
Syndromes as described under 291.1 but not due to alcohol.

294.1 Dementia in conditions classified elsewhere
 Dementia not classifiable as senile, presenile or arteriosclerotic (290.-) but associated with
 other underlying conditions.
Dementia in:
   cerebral lipidoses
   epilepsy
   general paralysis of the insane
   hepatolenticular degeneration
   Huntington's chorea
   multiple sclerosis
   polyarteritis nodosa
Use additional code to identify the underlying physical condition

 294.8 Other
 States that fulfill the criteria of an organic psychosis but do not take the form of a con-
 fusional state (293.-), a nonalcoholic Korsakov's psychosis (294.0) or a dementia (294.1).
Mixed paranoid and affective Epileptic psychosis NOS (code
     organic psychotic states also 345.-)
 Excludes: mild memory disturbances, not amounting to dementia (310.1)

 294.9 Unspecified

                         OTHER PSYCHOSES (295-299)

 295 Schizophrenic psychoses
 A group of psychoses in which there is a fundamental disturbance of personality, a charac-
 teristic distortion of thinking, often a sense of being controlled by alien forces, delusions
 which may be bizarre, disturbed perception, abnormal affect out of keeping with the real


 416 Appendix D

 situation, and autism. Nevertheless, clear consciousness and intellectual capacity are usually
 maintained. The disturbance of personality involves its most basic functions which give the
 normal person his feeling of individuality, uniqueness and self-direction. The most intimate
 thoughts, feelings and acts are often felt to be known to or shared by others and explanatory
delusions may develop, to the effect that natural or supernatural forces are at work to
 influence the schizophrenic person's thoughts and actions in ways that are often bizarre.
 He may see himself as the pivot of all that happens. Hallucinations, especially of hearing,
 are common and may comment on the patient or address him. Perception is frequently
 disturbed in other ways; there may be perplexity, irrelevant features may become all-
 important and, accompanied by passivity feelings, may lead the patient to believe that
 everyday objects and situations possess a special, usually sinister, meaning intended for
 him. In the characteristic schizophrenic disturbance of thinking, peripheral and irrelevant
 features of a total concept, which are inhibited in normal directed mental activity, are
 brought to the forefront and utilized in place of the elements relevant and appropriate to
 the situation. Thus thinking becomes vague, elliptical and obscure, and its expression in
 speech sometimes incomprehensible. Breaks and interpolations in the flow of consecutive
 thought are frequent, and the patient may be convinced that his thoughts are being with-
 drawn by some outside agency. Mood may be shallow, capricious or incongruous. Ambiv-
 alence and disturbance of volition may appear as inertia, negativism or stupor. Catatonia
 may be present. The diagnosis "schizophrenia" should not be made unless there is, or has
 been evident during the same illness, characteristic disturbance of thought, perception,
 mood, conduct, or personality—preferably in at least two of these areas. The diagnosis
 should not be restricted to conditions running a protracted, deteriorating, or chronic course.
 In addition to making the diagnosis on the criteria just given, effort should be made to
 specify one of the following subdivisions of schizophrenia, according to the predominant
 symptoms.
 Includes: schizophrenia of the types described in 295.0-295.9 occurring in
                children
 Excludes: childhood type schizophrenia (299.9)
            infantilep autism  (299.01)

 295.0 Simple type
 A psychosis in which there is insidious development of oddities of conduct, inability to
 meet the demands of society, and decline in total performance. Delusions and hallucina-
 tions are not in evidence and the condition is less obviously psychotic than are the
 hebephrenic, catatonic and paranoid types of schizophrenia. With increasing social im-
 poverishment vagrancy may ensue and the patient becomes self-absorbed, idle and aimless.
 Because the schizophrenic symptoms are not clear-cut, diagnosis of this form should be
 made sparingly, if at all.
 Schizophrenia simplex
 Excludes: latent schizophrenia (295.5)

 295.1 Hebephrenic type
 A form of schizophrenia in which affective changes are prominent, delusions and hallucina-
 tions fleeting and fragmentary, behaviour irresponsible and unpredictable and mannerisms
 common. The mood is shallow and inappropriate, accompanied by giggling or self-satisfied,
 self-absorbed smiling, or by a lofty manner, grimaces, mannerisms, pranks, hypochondriacal
 complaints and reiterated phrases. Thought is disorganized. There is a tendency to remain
 solitary, and behaviour seems empty of purpose and feeling. This form of schizophrenia
 usually starts between the ages of 15 and 25 years.


                                                    Historical Review, ICD-9 417

 Hebephrenia
 295.2 Catatonic type
 Includes as an essential feature prominent psychomotor disturbances often alternating
 between extremes such as hyperkinesis and stupor, or automatic obedience and negativism.
 Constrained attitudes may be maintained for long periods: if the patient's limbs are put in
 some unnatural position they may be held there for some time after the external force has
 been removed. Severe excitement may be a striking feature of the condition. Depressive
 or hypomanic concomitants may be present.
 Catatonic: Schizophrenic:
   agitation catalepsy
   excitation catatonia
   stupor                                flexibilitas cerea

 295.3 Paranoid type
 The form of schizophrenia in which relatively stable delusions, which may be accompanied
 by hallucinations, dominate the clinical picture. The delusions are frequently of persecution
 but may take other forms [for example of jealousy, exalted birth, Messianic mission, or
bodily change]. Hallucinations and erratic behaviour may occur; in some cases conduct is
 seriously disturbed from the outset, thought disorder may be gross, and affective flattening
 with fragmentary delusions and hallucinations may develop.
 Paraphrenic schizophrenia
 Excludes: paraphrenia, involutional paranoid state (297.2)
             paranoia (297.1)

 295.4 Acute schizophrenic episode

 Schizophrenic disorders, other than those listed above, in which there is a dream-like state
with slight clouding of consciousness and perplexity. External things, people and events
 may become charged with personal significance for the patient. There may be ideas of
 reference and emotional turmoil. In many such cases remission occurs within a few weeks
 or months, even without treatment.
 Oneirophrenia Schizophrenif orm:
                                          attack
                                          psychosis, confusional type
 Excludes: acute forms of schizophrenia of:
                catatonic type (295.2)
                hebephrenic type (295.1)
                paranoid type (295.3)
                simple type (295.0)

 295.5 Latent schizophrenia
 It has not been possible to produce a generally acceptable description for this condition.
 It is not recommended for general use, but a description is provided for those who
 believe it to be useful: a condition of eccentric or inconsequent behaviour and anomalies
 of affect which give the impression of schizophrenia though no definite and characteristic
 schizophrenic anomalies, present or past, have been manifest.


418 Appendix D

The inclusion terms indicate that this is the best place to classify some other poorly defined
varieties of schizophrenia.
Latent schizophrenic reaction Schizophrenia:
Schizophrenia: pseudoneurotic
  borderline pseudopsychopathic
  prepsychotic
  prodromal
Excludes: schizoid personality (301.2)

295.6 Residual schizophrenia
A chronic form of schizophrenia in which the symptoms that persist from the acute phase
have mostly lost their sharpness. Emotional response is blunted and thought disorder, even
when gross, does not prevent the accomplishment of routine work.
Chronic imdifferentiated schizophrenia
Restzustand (schizophrenic)
Schizophrenic residual state

295.7 Schizoaffective type
A psychosis in which pronounced manic or depressive features are intermingled with
schizophrenic features and which tends towards remission without permanent defect, but
which is prone to recur. The diagnosis should be made only when both the affective and
schizophrenic symptoms are pronounced.
Cyclic schizophrenia
Mixed schizophrenic and affective psychosis
Schizoaffective psychosis
Schizophreniform psychosis, affective type

295.8 Other
Schizophrenia of specified type not classifiable under 295.0-295.7.
Acute (undifferentiated) Atypical schizophrenia
     schizophrenia Coenesthopathic schizophrenia
Excludes: infantile autism (299.0)

295.9 Unspecified
To be used only as a last resort.
Schizophrenia NOS
Schizophrenic reaction NOS
Schizophreniform psychosis NOS

296 Affective psychoses
Mental disorders, usually recurrent, in which there is a severe disturbance of mood [mostly
compounded of depression and anxiety but also manifested as elation and excitement] which
is accompanied by one or more of the following: delusions, perplexity, disturbed attitude to


                                                    Historical Review, ICD-9 419

 self, disorder of perception and behaviour; these are all in keeping with the patient's
 prevailing mood [as are hallucinations when they occur]. There is a strong tendency to
 suicide. For practical reasons, mild disorders of mood may also be included here if the
 symptoms match closely the descriptions given; this applies particularly to mild hypo-
 mania.
 Excludes: reactive depressive psychosis (298.0)
             reactive excitation (298.1)
             neurotic depression (300.4)

 296.0 Manic-depressive psychosis, manic type
 Mental disorders characterized by states of elation or excitement out of keeping with the
 patient's circumstances and varying from enhanced liveliness [hypomania] to violent, almost
 uncontrollable excitement. Aggression and anger, flight of ideas, distractibility, impaired
 judgement, and grandiose ideas are common.
 Hypomania NOS Manic psychosis
 Hypomanic psychosis Manic-depressive psychosis or
 Mania (monopolar) NOS reaction:
 Manic disorder hypomanic
                                         manic
 Excludes: circular type if there was a previous attack of depression (296.2)

 296.1 Manic-depressive psychosis, depressed type
An affective psychosis in which there is a widespread depressed mood of gloom and
wretchedness with some degree of anxiety. There is often reduced activity but there may be
 restlessness and agitation. There is a marked tendency to recurrence; in a few cases this
 may be at regular intervals.
 Depressive psychosis Manic-depressive reaction,
 Endogenous depression depressed
 Involutional melancholia Monopolar depression
                                       Psychotic depression
 Excludes: circular type if previous attack was of manic type (296.3)
             depression NOS (311)

 296.2 Manic-depressive psychosis, circular type but currently manic
 An affective psychosis which has appeared in both the depressive and the manic form,
 either alternating or separated by an interval of normality, but in which the manic form is
 currently present. [The manic phase is far less frequent than the depressive].
 Bipolar disorder, now manic
 Excludes: brief compensatory or rebound mood swings (296.8)

 296.3 Manic-depressive psychosis, circular type but currently depressed
 Circular type (see 296.2) in which the depressive form is currently present.
 Bipolar disorder, now depressed
 Excludes: brief compensatory or rebound mood swings (296.8)


420 Appendix D

296.4 Manic-depressive psychosis, circular type, mixed
An affective psychosis in which both manic and depressive symptoms are present at the
same time.

296.5 Manic-depressive psychosis, circular type, current condition not specified
Circular type (see 296.2) in which the current condition is not specified as either manic
or depressive.

296.6 Manic-depressive psychosis, other and unspecified
Use this code for cases where no other information is available, except the unspecified
term, manic-depressive psychosis, or for syndromes corresponding to the descriptions of
depressed (296.1) or manic (296.0) types but which for other reasons cannot be classified
under 296.0-296.5.
Manic-depressive psychosis: Manic-depressive:
   NOS reaction NOS
  mixed type syndrome NOS

296.8 Other
Excludes: psychogenic affective psychoses (298.-)

296.9 Unspecified
Affective psychosis NOS
Melancholia NOS

297 Paranoid states
Excludes: acute paranoid reaction (298.3)
             alcoholic jealousy (291.5)
             paranoid schizophrenia (295.3)

297.0 Paranoid state, simple
A psychosis, acute or chronic, not classifiable as schizophrenia or affective psychosis, in
which delusions, especially of being influenced, persecuted or treated in some special way,
are the main symptoms. The delusions are of a fairly fixed, elaborate and systematized
kind.

297.1 Paranoia
A rare chronic psychosis in which logically constructed systematized delusions have devel-
oped gradually without concomitant hallucinations or the schizophrenic type of disordered
thinking. The delusions are mostly of grandeur [the paranoiac prophet or inventor], perse-
cution or somatic abnormality.
Excludes: paranoid personality disorder (301.0)

297.2 Paraphrenia
Paranoid psychosis in which there are conspicuous hallucinations, often in several modalities.
Affective symptoms and disordered thinking, if present, do not dominate the clinical picture
and the personality is well preserved.


                                                    Historical Review, ICD-9 421

Involutional paranoid state
Late paraphrenia

297.3 Induced psychosis
Mainly delusional psychosis, usually chronic and often without florid features, which appears
to have developed as a result of a close, if not dependent, relationship with another person
who already has an established similar psychosis. The delusions are at least partly shared.
The rare cases in which several persons are affected should also be included here.
Folie a deux Induced paranoid disorder

297.8 Other
Paranoid states which, though in many ways akin to schizophrenic or affective states, cannot
readily be classified under any of the preceding rubrics, nor under 298.4.
Paranoia querulans Sensitiver Beziehungswahn
Excludes: senile paranoid state (297.2)

297.9 Unspecified
Paranoid:
   psychosis NOS
   reaction NOS
   state NOS

298 Other nonorganic psychoses
Categories 298.0-298.8 should be restricted to the small group of psychotic conditions that
are largely or entirely attributable to a recent life experience. They should not be used for
the wider range of psychoses in which environmental factors play some [but not the major]
part in aetiology.

298.0 Depressive type
A depressive psychosis which can be similar in its symptoms to manic-depressive psychosis,
depressed type (296.1) but is apparently provoked by saddening stress such as a bereave-
ment, or a severe disappointment or frustration. There may be less diurnal variation of
symptoms than in 296.1, and the delusions are more often understandable in the context
of the life experiences. There is usually a serious disturbance of behaviour, e.g., major
suicidal attempt.
Reactive depressive psychosis
Psychogenic depressive psychosis
Excludes: manic-depressive psychosis, depressed type (296.1)
             neurotic depression (300.4)

298.1 Excitative type
An affective psychosis similar in its symptoms to manic-depressive psychosis, manic type,
but apparently provoked by emotional stress.
Excludes: manic-depressive psychosis, manic type (296.0)


422 Appendix D

298.2 Reactive confusion
Mental disorders with clouded consciousness, disorientation [though less marked than in
organic confusion] and diminished accessibility often accompanied by excessive activity
and apparently provoked by emotional stress.
Psychogenic confusion
Psychogenic twilight state
Excludes: acute confusional state (293.0)

298.3 Acute paranoid reaction
Paranoid states apparently provoked by some emotional stress. The stress is often miscon-
strued as an attack or threat. Such states are particularly prone to occur in prisoners or as
acute reactions to a strange and threatening environment, e.g., in immigrants.
Bouffee delirante
Excludes: paranoid states (297.-)

298.4 Psychogenic paranoid psychosis
Psychogenic or reactive paranoid psychosis of any type which is more protracted than the
acute reactions covered in 298.3. Where there is a diagnosis of psychogenic paranoid
psychosis which does not specify "acute" this coding should be made.
Protracted reactive paranoid psychosis

298.8 Other and unspecified reactive psychosis
Hysterical psychosis Psychogenic stupor
Psychogenic psychosis NOS

298.9 Unspecified psychosis
To be used only as a last resort, when no other term can be used.

Psychosis NOS

299 Psychoses with origin specific to childhood
This category should be used only for psychoses which always begin before puberty. Adult-
type psychoses such as schizophrenia or manic-depressive psychoses when occurring in
childhood should be coded elsewhere under the appropriate heading—i.e., 295 and 296 for
the examples given.

299.0 Infantile autism
A syndrome present from birth or beginning almost invariably in the first 30 months.
Responses to auditory and sometimes to visual stimuli are abnormal and there are usually
severe problems in the understanding of spoken language. Speech is delayed and, if it
develops, is characterized by echolalia, the reversal of pronouns, immature grammatical
structure and inability to use abstract terms. There is generally an impairment in the social


                                                    Historical Review, ICD-9 423

use of both verbal and gestural language. Problems in social relationships are most severe
before the age of five years and include an impairment in the development of eye-to-eye
gaze, social attachments, and cooperative play. Ritualistic behaviour is usual and may
include abnormal routines, resistance to change, attachment to odd objects and stereotyped
patterns of play. The capacity for abstract or symbolic thought and for imaginative play is
diminished. Intelligence ranges from severely subnormal to normal or above. Performance
is usually better on tasks involving rote memory or visuospatial skills than on those requir-
ing symbolic or linguistic skills.
Childhood autism Kanner's syndrome
Infantile psychosis
Excludes: disintegrative psychosis (299.1)
             Heller's syndrome (299.1)
             schizophrenic syndrome of childhood (299.9)

299.1 Disintegrative psychosis

A disorder in which normal or near-normal development for the first few years is followed
by a loss of social skills and of speech, together with a severe disorder of emotions,
behaviour and relationships. Usually this loss of speech and of social competence takes
place over a period of a few months and is accompanied by the emergence of over-
activity and of stereotypies. In most cases there is intellectual impairment, but this is not
 a necessary part of the disorder. The condition may follow overt brain disease—such as
measles encephalitis—but it may also occur in the absence of any known organic brain
disease or damage. Use additional code to identify any associated neurological disorder.
Heller's syndrome
 Excludes: infantile autism (299.0)
             schizophrenic syndrome of childhood (299.9)

299.8 Other
A variety of atypical psychoses which may show some, but not all, of the features of infan-
 tile autism. Symptoms may include stereotyped repetitive movements, hyperkinesis, self-
injury, retarded speech development, echolalia and impaired social relationships. Such dis-
orders may occur in children of any level of intelligence but are particularly common in
those with mental retardation.
Atypical childhood psychosis
Excludes: simple stereotypies without psychotic disturbance (307.3)

299.9   Unspecified
 Child psychosis NOS
 Schizophrenia, childhood type NOS
 Schizophrenic syndrome of childhood NOS
 Excludes: schizophrenia of adult type occurring in childhood (295.0-
                  295.8)


424 Appendix D

            NEUROTIC DISORDERS, PERSONALITY DISORDERS AND OTHER
                  NONPSYCHOTIC MENTAL DISORDERS (300-316)

300 Neurotic disorders
The distinction between neurosis and psychosis is difficult and remains subject to debate.
However, it has been retained in view of its wide use.
Neurotic disorders are mental disorders without any demonstrable organic basis in which
the patient may have considerable insight and has unimpaired reality testing, in that he
usually does not confuse his morbid subjective experiences and fantasies with external
reality. Behaviour may be greatly affected although usually remaining within socially
acceptable limits, but personality is not disorganized. The principal manifestations include
excessive anxiety, hysterical symptoms, phobias, obsessional and compulsive symptoms, and
depression.

300.0 Anxiety states
Various combinations of physical and mental manifestations of anxiety, not attributable
to real danger and occurring either in attacks or as a persisting state. The anxiety is
usually diffuse and may extend to panic. Other neurotic features such as obsessional or
hysterical symptoms may be present but do not dominate the clinical picture.
Anxiety: Panic:
  neurosis attack
  reaction disorder
  state (neurotic) state
Excludes: neurasthenia (300.5)
           psychophysiological disorders (306.-)

300.1 Hysteria
Mental disorders in which motives, of which the patient seems unaware, produce either a
restriction of the field of consciousness or disturbances of motor or sensory function which
may seem to have psychological advantage or symbolic value. It may be characterized by
conversion phenomena or dissociative phenomena. In the conversion form the chief or
only symptoms consist of psychogenic disturbance of function in some part of the body,
e.g., paralysis, tremor, blindness, deafness, seizures. In the dissociative variety, the most
prominent feature is a narrowing of the field of consciousness which seems to serve an
unconscious purpose and is commonly accompanied or followed by a selective amnesia.
There may be dramatic but essentially superficial changes of personality sometimes taking
the form of a fugue [wandering state]. Behaviour may mimic psychosis or, rather, the
patient's idea of psychosis.
Astasia-abasia, hysterical Dissociative reaction or state
Compensation neurosis Ganser's syndrome, hysterical
Conversion hysteria Hysteria NOS
Conversion reaction Multiple personality

Excludes: adjustment reaction (309.-)
           anorexia nervosa (307.1)
           gross stress reaction (308.-)
           hysterical personality (301.5)
           psychophysiological disorders (306.-)


                                                    Historical Review, ICD-9 425

300.2 Phobic state
Neurotic states with abnormally intense dread of certain objects or specific situations which
would not normally have that effect. If the anxiety tends to spread from a specified situa-
tion or object to a wider range of circumstances, it becomes akin to or identical with
anxiety state, and should be classified as such (300.0).
Agoraphobia Claustrophobia
Animal phobias Phobia NOS
Anxiety-hysteria
Excludes: anxiety state (300.0)
             obsessional phobias (300.3)

300.3 Obsessive-compulsive disorders
States in which the outstanding symptom is a feeling of subjective compulsion—which
must be resisted—to carry out some action, to dwell on an idea, to recall an experience,
or to ruminate on an abstract topic. Unwanted thoughts which intrude, the insistency
of words or ideas, ruminations or trains of thought are perceived by the patient to be
inappropriate or nonsensical. The obsessional urge or idea is recognized as alien to the
personality but as coming from within the self. Obsessional actions may be quasi-ritual
performances designed to relieve anxiety e.g., washing the hands to cope with contamination.
Attempts to dispel the unwelcome thoughts or urges may lead to a severe struggle, with
intense anxiety.
Anankastic neurosis
Compulsive neurosis
Excludes: obsessive-compulsive symptoms occurring in:
               endogenous depression (296.1)
               schizophrenia (295.-)
               organic states, e.g., encephalitis

300.4 Neurotic depression
A neurotic disorder characterized by disproportionate depression which has usually recog-
nizably ensued on a distressing experience; it does not include among its features delusions
or hallucinations, and there is often preoccupation with the psychic trauma which pre-
ceded the illness, e.g., loss of a cherished person or possession. Anxiety is also frequently
present and mixed states of anxiety and depression should be included here. The dis-
tinction between depressive neurosis and psychosis should be made not only upon the
degree of depression but also on the presence or absence of other neurotic and psychotic
characteristics and upon the degree of disturbance of the patient's behaviour.
Anxiety depression Neurotic depressive state
Depressive reaction Reactive depression
Excludes: adjustment reaction with depressive symptoms (309.0)
             depression NOS (311)
             manic-depressive psychosis, depressed type (296.1)
             reactive depressive psychosis (298.0)

300.5 Neurasthenia
A neurotic disorder characterized by fatigue, irritability, headache, depression, insomnia,
difficulty in concentration, and lack of capacity for enjoyment [anhedonia]. It may follow


426 Appendix D

or accompany an infection or exhaustion, or arise from continued emotional stress. If
neurasthenia is associated with a physical disorder, the latter should also be coded.
Nervous debility
Excludes: anxiety state (300.0)
            neurotic depression (300.4)
            psychophysiological disorders (306.-)
             specific nonpsychotic mental disorders following organic
                  brain damage (310.-)

300.6 Depersonalization syndrome
A neurotic disorder with an unpleasant state of disturbed perception in which external
objects or parts of one's own body are experienced as changed in their quality, unreal,
remote or automatized. The patient is aware of the subjective nature of the change he
experiences. Depersonalization may occur as a feature of several mental disorders includ-
ing depression, obsessional neurosis, anxiety and schizophrenia; in that case the condition
should not be classified here but in the corresponding major category.
Derealization (neurotic)

300.7 Hypochondriasis
A neurotic disorder in which the conspicuous features are excessive concern with one's
health in general or the integrity and functioning of some part of one's body, or, less
frequently, one's mind. It is usually associated with anxiety and depression. It may occur
as a feature of severe mental disorder and in that case should not be classified here but
in the corresponding major category.
Excludes: hysteria (300.1)
             manic-depressive psychosis, depressed type (296.1)
             neurasthenia (300.5)
             obsessional disorder (300.3)
             schizophrenia (295.-)

300.8 Other neurotic disorders
Neurotic disorders not classified elsewhere, e.g., occupational neurosis. Patients with mixed
neuroses should not be classified in this category but according to the most prominent
symptoms they display.
Briquet's disorder
Occupational neurosis, including writer's cramp
Psychasthenia
Psychasthenic neurosis

300.9   Unspecified
To be used only as a last resort.
Neurosis NOS Psychoneurosis NOS

301 Personality disorders
Deeply ingrained maladaptive patterns of behaviour generally recognizable by the time
of adolescence or earlier and continuing throughout most of adult life, although often


                                                    Historical Review, ICD-9 427

 becoming less obvious in middle or old age. The personality is abnormal either in the
 balance of its components, their quality and expression or in its total aspect. Because of
 this deviation or psychopathy the patient suffers or others have to suffer and there is an
 adverse effect upon the individual or on society. It includes what is sometimes called
psychopathic personality, but if this is determined primarily by malfunctioning of the
brain, it should not be classified here but as one of the nonpsychotic organic brain syn-
 dromes (310). When the patient exhibits an anomaly of personality directly related to his
 neurosis or psychosis, e.g., schizoid personality and schizophrenia or anankastic personality
 and obsessive compulsive neurosis, the relevant neurosis or psychosis which is in evidence
 should be diagnosed in addition.

 Character neurosis

 301.0 Paranoid personality disorder

Personality disorder in which there is excessive sensitiveness to setbacks or to what are
taken to be humiliations and rebuffs, a tendency to distort experience by misconstruing the
 neutral or friendly actions of others as hostile or contemptuous, and a combative and
tenacious sense of personal rights. There may be a proneness to jealousy or excessive
 self-importance. Such persons may feel helplessly humiliated and put upon; others, like-
 wise excessively sensitive, are aggressive and insistent. In all cases there is excessive self-
 reference.
 Fanatic personality Paranoid personality (disorder)
 Paranoid traits

 Excludes: acute paranoid reaction (298.3)
             alcoholic paranoia (291.5)
             paranoid schizophrenia (295.3)
             paranoid states (297.-)

 301.1 Affective personality disorder
Personality disorder characterized by lifelong predominance of a pronounced mood which
may be persistently depressive, persistently elated, or alternately one then the other.
 During periods of elation there is unshakeable optimism and an enhanced zest for life
 and activity, whereas periods of depression are marked by worry, pessimism, low output
 of energy and a sense of futility.
 Cycloid personality Depressive personality
 Cyclothymic personality
 Excludes: affective psychoses (296.-)
             cyclothymia (296.2-296.5)
             neurasthenia (300.5)
             neurotic depression (300.4)

 301.2 Schizoid personality disorder
 Personality disorder in which there is withdrawal from affectional, social and other con-
 tacts with autistic preference for fantasy and introspective reserve. Behaviour may be
 slightly eccentric or indicate avoidance of competitive situations. Apparent coolness and
 detachment may mask an incapacity to express feeling.

 Excludes: schizophrenia (295.-)


428 Appendix D

301.3 Explosive personality disorder
Personality disorder characterized by instability of mood with liability to intemperate
outbursts of anger, hate, violence or affection. Aggression may be expressed in words
or in physical violence. The outbursts cannot readily be controlled by the affected persons,
who are not otherwise prone to antisocial behaviour.
Aggressive: Emotional instability (excessive)
   personality Pathological emotionality
   reaction Quarrelsomeness
Aggressiveness
Excludes: dyssocial personality (301.7)
             hysterical neurosis (300.1)

 301.4 Anankastic personality disorder
 Personality disorder characterized by feelings of personal insecurity, doubt and incom-
pleteness leading to excessive conscientiousness, checking, stubbornness and caution.
 There may be insistent and unwelcome thoughts or impulses which do not attain the
severity of an obsessional neurosis. There is perfectionism and meticulous accuracy and
 a need to check repeatedly in an attempt to ensure this. Rigidity and excessive doubt
may be conspicuous.
Compulsive personality Obsessional personality
 Excludes: obsessive-compulsive disorder (300.3)
             phobic state (300.2)

 301.5 Hysterical personality disorder
 Personality disorder characterized by shallow, labile affectivity, dependence on others,
 craving for appreciation and attention, suggestibility and theatricality. There is often
 sexual immaturity, e.g., frigidity and over-responsiveness to stimuli. Under stress hysterical
symptoms [neurosis] may develop.
Histrionic personality Psychoinfantile personality
 Excludes: hysterical neurosis (300.1)

 301.6 Asthenia personality disorder
 Personality disorder characterized by passive compliance with the wishes of elders and
 others and a weak inadequate response to the demands of daily life. Lack of vigour
 may show itself in the intellectual or emotional spheres; there is little capacity for
enjoyment.
Dependent personality Passive personality
 Inadequate personality
 Excludes: neurasthenia (300.5)

 301.7 Personality disorder with predominantly sociopathic or asocial mani-
         festation
 Personality disorder characterized by disregard for social obligations, lack of feeling for
others, and impetuous violence or callous unconcern. There is a gross disparity between
behaviour and the prevailing social norms. Behaviour is not readily modifiable by experi-


                                             Historical Review, ICD-9 429

ence, including punishment. People with this personality are often affectively cold and may
be abnormally aggressive or irresponsible. Their tolerance to frustration is low; they
blame others or offer plausible rationalizations for the behaviour which brings them into
conflict with society.
Amoral personality Asocial personality
Antisocial personality
Excludes: disturbance of conduct without specifiable personality disorder
                (312.-)
           explosive personality (301.3)

301.8 Other personality disorders
Personality: Personality:
  eccentric immature
  "haltlose" type passive-aggressive
                                    psychoneurotic
Excludes: psychoinfantile personality (301.5)

301.9 Unspecified
Pathological personality NOS Psychopathic:
Personality disorder NOS constitutional state
                                    personality (disorder)

302 Sexual deviations and disorders
Abnormal sexual inclinations or behaviour which are part of a referral problem. The
limits and features of normal sexual inclination and behaviour have not been stated
absolutely in different societies and cultures but are broadly such as serve approved
social and biological purposes. The sexual activity of affected persons is directed pri-
marily either towards people not of the opposite sex, or towards sexual acts not associated
with coitus normally or towards coitus performed under abnormal circumstances. If the
anomalous behaviour becomes manifest only during psychosis or other mental illness the
condition should be classified under the major illness. It is common for more than one
anomaly to occur together in the same individual; in the case the predominant deviation
is classified. It is preferable not to include in this category individuals who perform
deviant sexual acts when normal sexual outlets are not available to them.

302.0 Homosexuality
Exclusive or predominant sexual attraction for persons of the same sex with or without
physical relationship. Code homosexuality here whether or not it is considered as a
mental disorder.
Lesbianism
Excludes: homosexual paedophilia (302.2)

302.1 Bestiality
Sexual or anal intercourse with animals.

302.2 Paedophilia
Sexual deviations in which an adult engages in sexual activity with a child of the same
or opposite sex.


430 Appendix D

302.3 Transvestism
Sexual deviation in which sexual pleasure is derived from dressing in clothes of the
opposite sex. There is no consistent attempt to take on the identity or behaviour of the
opposite sex.
Excludes: trans-sexualism (302.5)

302.4 Exhibitionism
Sexual deviation in which the main sexual pleasure and gratification is derived from
exposure of the genitals to a person of the opposite sex.

302.5 Trans-sexualism
Sexual deviation centered around fixed beliefs that the overt bodily sex is wrong. The
resulting behaviour is directed towards either changing the sexual organs by operation,
or completely concealing the bodily sex by adopting both the dress and behaviour of the
opposite sex.
Excludes: transvestism (302.3)

302.6 Disorders of psychosexual identity
Behaviour occurring in preadolescents of immature psychosexuality which is similar to that
shown in the sexual deviations described under transvestism (302.3) and trans-sexualism
(302.5). Cross-dressing is intermittent, although it may be frequent, and identification with
the behaviour and appearance of the opposite sex is not yet fixed. The commonest form is
feminism in boys.

Gender-role disorder
Excludes: homosexuality (302.0)
             trans-sexualism (302.5)
             transvestism (302.3)

302.7 frigidity and impotence
Frigidity—dislike of or aversion to sexual intercourse, of psychological origin, of sufficient
intensity to lead, if not to active avoidance, to marked anxiety, discomfort or pain when
normal sexual intercourse takes place. Less severe degrees of this disorder that also give
rise to consultation should also be coded here.
Impotence—sustained inability, due to psychological causes, to maintain an erection which
will allow normal heterosexual penetration and ejaculation to take place.
Dyspareunia, psychogenic
Excludes: impotence of organic origin
             normal transient symptoms from ruptured hymen
             transient or occasional failures of erection due to fatigue,
                  anxiety, alcohol or drugs

302.8 Other
Fetishism Sadism
Masochism


                                                    Historical Review, ICD-9 431

 302.9   Unspecified

 303 Alcohol dependence syndrome
 A state, psychic and usually also physical, resulting from taking alcohol, characterized by
 behavioural and other responses that always include a compulsion to take alcohol on a
continuous or periodic basis in order to experience its psychic effects, and sometimes to
 avoid the discomfort of its absence; tolerance may or may not be present. A person may
 be dependent on alcohol and other drugs; if so also make the appropriate 304 coding. If
 dependence is associated with alcoholic psychosis or with physical complications, both
 should be coded.
 Acute drunkenness in alcoholism Dipsomania
 Chronic alcoholism
 Excludes: alcoholic psychoses (291.-)
             drunkenness NOS (305.0)
             physical complications of alcohol, such as:
                cirrhosis of liver (571.2)
                epilepsy (345.-)
                gastritis (535.3)

 304 Drug dependence
 A state, psychic and sometimes also physical, resulting from taking a drug, characterized
 by behavioural and other responses that always include a compulsion to take a drug on a
 continuous or periodic basis in order to experience its psychic effects, and sometimes to
 avoid the discomfort of its absence. Tolerance may or may not be present. A person may be
dependent on more than one drug.
 Excludes: nondependent abuse of drugs (305.-)

 304.0 Morphine type
Heroin Opium alkaloids and their derivatives
Methadone Synthetics with morphine-like effects
 Opium

 304.1 Barbiturate type
Barbiturates
 Nonbarbiturate sedatives and tranquillizers with a similar effect:
   chlordiazepoxide
   diazepam
   glutethimide
   meprobamate

 304.2 Cocaine
 Coca leaves and derivatives

 304.3 Cannabis
Hemp Marijuana
 Hashish


432 Appendix D

304.4 Amphetamine type and other psychostimulants
Phenmetrazine Methylphenidate

304.5 Hallucinogens
LSD and derivatives Mescaline
Psilocybin

304.6 Other
Absinthe addiction Glue sniffing
Excludes: tobacco dependence (305.1)

304.7 Combinations of morphine type drug with any other
304.8 Combinations excluding morphine type drug
304.9 Unspecified
Drug addiction NOS Drug dependence NOS

305 Nondependent abuse of drugs
Includes cases where a person, for whom no other diagnosis is possible, has come under
medical care because of the maladaptive effect of a drug on which he is not dependent (as
defined in 304.-) and that he has taken on his own initiative to the detriment of his health
or social functioning. When drug abuse is secondary to a psychiatric disorder, code the
disorder.
Excludes: alcohol dependence syndrome (303)
          drug dependence (304.-)
          drug withdrawal syndrome (292.0)
          poisoning by drugs or medicaments (960-979)

305.0 Alcohol
Cases of acute intoxication or "hangover" effects.
Drunkenness NOS "Hangover" (alcohol)
Excessive drinking of alcohol NOS Inebriety NOS
Excludes: alcoholic psychoses (291.-)
          physical complications of alcohol, such as:
            cirrhosis of liver (571.2)
            epilepsy (345.-)
            gastritis (535.3)

305.1 Tobacco
Cases in which tobacco is used to the detriment of a person's health or social functioning
or in which there is tobacco dependence. Dependence is included here rather than under
304.- because tobacco differs from other drugs of dependence in its psychotoxic effects.
Tobacco dependence


                                        Historical Review, ICD-9 433

305.2 Cannabis

305.3 Hallucinogens
Cases of acute intoxication or "bad trips".
LSD reaction

305.4 Barbiturates and tranquillizers

Cases where a person has taken the drug to the detriment of his health or social functioning,
in doses above or for periods beyond those normally regarded as therapeutic.

 305.5 Morphine type
305.6 Cocaine type
305.7 Amphetamine type
305.8 Antidepressants
 305.9 Other, mixed or unspecified
 "Laxative habit" Nonprescribed use of drugs or
Misuse of drugs NOS patent medicinals

306 Physiological malfunction arising from mental factors
A variety of physical symptoms or types of physiological malfunction of mental origin, not
involving tissue damage and usually mediated through the autonomic nervous system. The
disorders are grouped according to body system. Codes 306.0-306.9 should not be used if
the physical symptom is secondary to a psychiatric disorder classifiable elsewhere. If tissue
damage is involved, code under 316.
Excludes: hysteria (300.1)
          psychic factors associated with physical conditions involving
              tissue damage classified elsewhere (316)
          specific nonpsychotic mental disorders following organic
              brain damage (310.-)

306.0 Musculoskeletal
Psychogenic torticollis
Excludes: Gilles de la Tourette's syndrome (307.2)
          tics (307.2)

306.1 Respiratory
Air hunger Psychogenic cough
Hiccough (psychogenic) Yawning
Hyperventilation
Excludes: psychogenic asthma (316 and 493.9)


434 Appendix D

306.2 Cardiovascular
Cardiac neurosis Neurocirculatory asthenia
Cardiovascular neurosis Psychogenic cardiovascular
                                disorder
Excludes: psychogenic paroxysmal tachycardia (316 and 427.9)

306.3 Skin
Psychogenic pruritus
Excludes: psychogenic:
            alopecia (316 and 704.0)
            dermatitis (316 and 692.-)
            eczema (316 and 691.9 or 692.-)
            urticaria (316 and 70S.-)

306.4 Gastrointestinal
Aerophagy Cyclical vomiting, psychogenic

Excludes: cyclical vomiting NOS (536.2)
          mucous colitis (316 and 564.1)
          psychogenic:
            cardiospasm (316 and 530.0)
            duodenal ulcer (316 and 532.-)
            gastric ulcer (316 and 531.-)
            peptic ulcer (316 and 533.-)

306.5 Genitourinary
Psychogenic dysmenorrhoea
Excludes: dyspareunia (302.7)
          enuresis (307.6)
          frigidity (302.7)
          impotence (302.7)

306.6 Endocrine
306.7 Organs of special sense
Excludes: hysterical blindness or deafness (300.1)

306.8 Other

Teeth-grinding

306.9 Unspecified
Psychophysiologic disorder NOS Psychosomatic disorder NOS


                                             Historical Review, ICD-9 435

307 Special symptoms or syndromes not elsewhere classified
Conditions in which an outstanding symptom or group of symptoms is not manifestly part
of a more fundamental classifiable condition.
Excludes: when due to mental disorders classified elsewhere
           when of organic origin

307.0 Stammering and stuttering
Disorders in the rhythm of speech, in which the individual knows precisely what he wishes
to say, but at the time is unable to say it because of an involuntary, repetitive prolongation
or cessation of a sound.
Excludes: dysphasia (784.5)
           lisping or lalling (307.9)
           retarded development of speech (315.3)

307.1 Anorexia nervosa
A disorder in which the main features are persistent active refusal to eat and marked loss
of weight. The level of activity and alertness is characteristically high in relation to the
degree of emaciation. Typically the disorder begins in teenage girls but it may sometimes
begin before puberty and rarely it occurs in males. Amenorrhoea is usual and there may
be a variety of other physiological changes including slow pulse and respiration, low body
temperature and dependent oedema. Unusual eating habits and attitudes toward food are
typical and sometimes starvation follows or alternates with periods of overeating. The
accompanying psychiatric symptoms are diverse.
Excludes: eating disturbance NOS (307.5)
           loss of appetite (783.0)
             of nonorganic origin (307.5)

307.2 Tics
Disorders of no known organic origin in which the outstanding feature consists of quick,
involuntary, apparently purposeless, and frequently repeated movements which are not due
to any neurological condition. Any part of the body may be involved but the face is most
frequently affected. Only one form of tic may be present, or there may be a combination
of tics which are carried out simultaneously, alternatively or consecutively. Gilles de la
Tourette's syndrome refers to a rare disorder occurring in individuals of any level of
intelligence in which facial tics and tic-like throat noises become more marked and more
generalized and in which later, whole words or short sentences [often with an obscene
content] are ejaculated spasmodically and involuntarily. There is some overlap with other
varieties of tic.
Excludes: nail-biting or thumb-sucking (307.9)
           stereotypies occurring in isolation (307.3)
           tics of organic origin (333.3)

307.3 Stereotyped repetitive movements
Disorders in which voluntary repetitive stereotyped movements, which are not due to any
psychiatric or neurological condition, constitute the main feature. Includes headbanging,
spasmus nutans, rocking, twirling, finger-flicking mannerisms and eye poking. Such move-


436 Appendix D

ments are particularly common in cases of mental retardation with sensory impairment or
with environmental monotony.
Stereotypies NOS
Excludes: tics:
               NOS (307.2)
               of organic origin (333.3)

307.4 Specific disorders of sleep
This category should only be used when a more precise medical or psychiatric diagnosis
cannot be made.
Hypersomnia
Insomnia
Inversion of sleep rhythm
                                of nonorganic origin
Nightmares
Night terrors
Sleepwalking
Excludes: narcolepsy (347.0)
             when of unspecified cause (780.5)

307.5 Other and unspecified disorders of eating
This category should only be used when a more precise medical or psychiatric diagnosis
cannot be made.
Infantile feeding disturbances
Loss of appetite
Overeating of nonorganic origin
Pica
Psychogenic vomiting
Excludes: anorexia:
               nervosa (307.1)
               of unspecified cause (783.0)
             overeating of unspecified cause (783.6)
             vomiting:
               NOS (787.0)
               cyclical (536.2)
                  psychogenic (306.4)

307.6 Enuresis
A disorder in which the main manifestation is a persistent involuntary voiding of urine by
day or night which is considered abnormal for the age of the individual. Sometimes the child
will have failed to gain bladder control and in other cases he will have gained control and
then lost it. Episodic or fluctuating enuresis should be included. The disorder would not
usually be diagnosed under the age of four years.
Enuresis (primary) (secondary) of nonorganic origin
Excludes: enuresis of unspecified cause (788.3)


                                                    Historical Review, ICD-9 437

307.7 Encopresis
A disorder in which the main manifestation is the persistent voluntary or involuntary
passage of formed motions of normal or near-normal consistency into places not intended
for that purpose in the individual's own sociocultural setting. Sometimes the child has failed
to gain bowel control, and sometimes he has gained control but then later again became
encopretic. There may be a variety of associated psychiatric symptoms and there may be
smearing of faeces. The condition would not usually be diagnosed under the age of four
years.
Encopresis (continuous) (discontinuous) of nonorganic origin
Excludes: encopresis of unspecified cause (787.6)

307.8 Psychalgia
Cases in which there are pains of mental origin, e.g., headache or backache, when a more
precise medical or psychiatric diagnosis cannot be made.
Tension headache Psychogenic backache
Excludes: migraine (346.-)
             pains not specifically attributable to a psychological cause (in):
                back (784.5)
                headache (784.0)
                joint (719.4)
                limb (729.5)
                lumbago (724.2)
                rheumatic (729.0)

307.9 Other and unspecified
 The use of this category should be discouraged. Most of the items listed in the inclusion
 terms are not indicative of psychiatric disorder and are included only because such terms
may sometimes still appear as diagnoses.
Hair plucking Masturbation
Lalling Nail-biting
Lisping Thumb-sucking

 308 Acute reaction to stress
Very transient disorders of any severity and nature which occur in individuals without any
apparent mental disorder in response to exceptional physical or mental stress, such as natural
catastrophe or battle, and which usually subside within hours or days.
 Catastrophic stress Exhaustion delirium
 Combat fatigue
 Excludes: adjustment reaction (309.-)

 308.0 Predominant disturbance of emotions
 Panic states, excitability, fear, depressions and anxiety fulfilling the above criteria.


438 Appendix D

308.1 Predominant disturbance of consciousness
Fugues fulfilling the above criteria.

308.2 Predominant psychomotor disturbance
Agitation states, stupor fulfilling the above criteria.

308.3 Other
Acute situational disturbance

308.4 Mixed
Many gross stress reactions include several elements but whenever possible a specific coding
under .0, .1, .2 or .3 should be made according to the preponderant type of disturbance. The
category of mixed disorders should only be used when there is such an admixture that this
cannot be done.

308.9 Unspecified

309 Adjustment reaction
Mild or transient disorders lasting longer than acute stress reactions (308.-) which occur in
individuals of any age without any apparent pre-existing mental disorder. Such disorders are
often relatively circumscribed or situation-specific, are generally reversible, and usually last
only a few months. They are usually closely related in time and content to stresses such as
bereavement, migration or separation experiences. Reactions to major stress that last longer
than a few days are also included here. In children such disorders are associated with no
significant distortion of development.
Excludes: acute reaction to major stress (308.-)
           neurotic disorders (300.-)

309.0 Brief depressive reaction
States of depression, not specifiable as manic-depressive, psychotic or neurotic, generally
transient, in which the depressive symptoms are usually closely related in time and content
to some stressful event.
Grief reaction
Excludes: affective psychoses (296.-)
           neurotic depression (300.4)
           prolonged depressive reaction (309.1)
           psychogenic depressive psychosis (298.0)

309.1 Prolonged depressive reaction
States of depression, not specifiable as manic-depressive, psychotic or neurotic, generally
long-lasting; usually developing in association with prolonged exposure to a stressful
situation.
Excludes: affective psychoses (296.-)
           brief depressive reaction (309.0)
           neurotic depression (300.4)
           psychogenic depressive psychosis (298.0)


                                             Historical Review, ICD-9 439

309.2 With predominant disturbance of other emotions
States, fulfilling the general criteria for adjustment reaction, in which the main symptoms are
emotional in type [anxiety, fear, worry, etc.] but not specifically depressive.
Abnormal separation anxiety Culture shock

309.3 With predominant disturbance of conduct
Mild or transient disorders, fulfilling the general criteria for adjustment reaction, in which
the main disturbance predominantly involves a disturbance of conduct. For example, an
adolescent grief reaction resulting in aggressive or antisocial disorder would be included
here.
Excludes: disturbance of conduct NOS (312.-)
           dyssocial behaviour without manifest psychiatric disorder (V71.0)
           personality disorder with predominantly sociopathic or asocial mani-
               festations (301.7)

309.4 With mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct
Disorders fulfilling the general definition in which both emotional disturbance and disturb-
ance of conduct are prominent features.

309.8 Other
Adjustment reaction with elective mutism
Hospitalism in children NOS

309.9 Unspecified
Adjustment reaction NOS Adaptation reaction NOS

310 Specific nonpsychotic mental disorders following organic brain damage
Note: This category should be used only for conditions where the form of the
       disorder is determined by the brain pathology.
Excludes: neuroses, personality disorders or other nonpsychotic conditions
               occurring in a form similar to that seen with functional dis-
               orders but in association with a physical condition; code to
               300.-, 301.-, etc., and use additional code to identify the physi-
               cal condition

310.0 Frontal lobe syndrome
Changes in behaviour following damage to the frontal areas of the brain or following
interference with the connections of those areas. There is a general diminution of self-
control, foresight, creativity and spontaneity, which may be manifest as increased irrita-
bility, selfishness, restlessness and lack of concern for others. Conscientiousness and powers
of concentration are often diminished, but measurable deterioration of intellect or memory
is not necessarily present. The overall picture is often one of emotional dullness, lack of
drive and slowness; but, particularly in persons previously with energetic, restless or aggres-
sive characteristics, there may be a change towards impulsiveness, boastfulness, temper


440 Appendix D

outbursts, silly fatuous humour, and the development of unrealistic ambitions; the direction
of change usually depends upon the previous personality. A considerable degree of recovery
is possible and may continue over the course of several years.
Lobotomy syndrome
Postleucotomy syndrome (state)
Excludes: postcontusional syndrome (310.2)

310.1 Cognitive or personality change of other type
Chronic, mild states of memory disturbance and intellectual deterioration, often accompanied
by increased irritability, querulousness, lassitude and complaints of physical weakness.
These states are often associated with old age, and may precede more severe states due to
brain damage classifiable under dementia of any type (290.-, and 294.-) or any condition in
293.- (Transient organic psychotic conditions).
Mild memory disturbance
Organic psychosyndrome of nonpsychotic severity

310.2 Postconcussional syndrome
States occurring after generalized contusion of the brain, in which the symptom picture may
resemble that of the frontal lobe syndrome (310.0) or that of any of the neurotic disorders
(300.0-300.9), but in which in addition, headache, giddiness, fatigue, insomnia and a subjec-
tive feeling of impaired intellectual ability are usually prominent. Mood may fluctuate, and
quite ordinary stress may produce exaggerated fear and apprehension. There may be marked
intolerance of mental and physical exertion, undue sensitivity to noise, and hypochondriacal
preoccupation. The symptoms are more common in persons who have previously suffered
from neurotic or personality disorders, or when there is a possiblity of compensation. This
syndrome is particularly associated with the closed type of head injury when signs of
localized brain damage are slight or absent, but it may also occur in other conditions.

Postcontusional syndrome (encephalopathy)
Status post commotio cerebri
Post-traumatic brain syndrome, nonpsychotic
Excludes: frontal lobe syndrome (310.0)
            postencephalitic syndrome (310.8)
             any organic psychotic conditions following head injury
                  (290.- to 294.0)

310.8 Other
Include here disorders resembling the postcontusional syndrome (310.2), associated with
infective or other diseases of the brain or surrounding tissues.
Other focal (partial) organic psychosyndromes

10.9.9 Unspecified

311 Depressive disorders, not elsewhere classified
States of depression, usually of moderate but occasionally of marked intensity, which have
no specifically manic-depressive or other psychotic depressive features and which do not


                                             Historical Review, ICD-9 441

appear to be associated with stressful events or other features specified under neurotic
depression.
Depressive disorder NOS Depression NO5
Depressive state NOS
Excludes: acute reaction to major stress with depressive symptoms (308.0)
           affective personality disorder (301.1)
           affective psychoses (296.-)
           brief depressive reaction (309.0)
           disturbance of emotions specific to childhood and adolescence, with
               misery and unhappiness (313.1)
           mixed adjustment reaction with depressive symptoms (309.4)
           neurotic depression (300.4)
           prolonged depressive adjustment reaction (309.1)
           psychogenic depressive psychosis (298.0)

312 Disturbance of conduct not elsewhere classified
Disorders mainly involving aggressive and destructive behaviour and disorders involving
delinquency. It should be used for abnormal behaviour, in individuals of any age, which
gives rise to social disapproval but which is not part of any other psychiatric condition.
Minor emotional disturbances may also be present. To be included, the behaviour—as judged
by its frequency, severity and type of associations with other symptoms—must be
abnormal in its context. Disturbances of conduct are distinguished from an adjustment
reaction by a longer duration and by a lack of close relationship in time and content to some
stress. They differ from a personality disorder by the absence of deeply ingrained maladap-
tive patterns of behaviour present from adolescence or earlier.
Excludes: adjustment reaction with disturbance of conduct (309.3)
           drug dependence (304.-)
           dyssocial behaviour without manifest psychiatric disorder (V71.0)
           personality disorder with predominantly sociopathic or asocial mani-
                festations (301.7)
           sexual deviations (302.-)

312.0 Unsocialized disturbance of conduct
Disorders characterized by behaviours such as defiance, disobedience, quarrelsomeness,
aggression, destructive behaviour, tantrums, solitary stealing, lying, teasing, bullying and
disturbed relationships with others. The defiance may sometimes take the form of sexual
misconduct.
Unsocialized aggressive disorder

312.1 Socialized disturbance of conduct
Disorders in individuals who have acquired the values or behaviours of a delinquent peer
group to whom they are loyal and with whom they characteristically steal, play truant, and
stay out late at night. There may also be promiscuity.
Group delinquency
Excludes: gang activity without manifest psychiatric disorder (V71.0)


 442 Appendix D

 312.2 Compulsive conduct disorder
 Disorder of conduct or delinquent act which is specifically compulsive in origin.
 Kleptomania

 312.3 Mixed disturbance of conduct and emotions
 Disorders involving behaviours listed for 312.0 and 312.1 but in which there is also consid-
 erable emotional distrubance as shown for example by anxiety, misery or obsessive mani-
festations.
 Neurotic delinquency
 Excludes: compulsive conduct disorder (312.2)

 312.8 Other

 312.9 Unspecified

 313 Disturbance of emotions specific to childhood and adolescence
 Less well differentiated emotional disorders characteristic of the childhood period. Where
the emotional disorder takes the form of a neurotic disorder described under 300.-, the
 appropriate 300.- coding should be made. This category differs from category 308.- in terms
of longer duration and by the lack of close relationship in time and content to some stress.
Excludes: adjustment reaction (309.-)
             masturbation, nail-biting, thumb-sucking and other isolated symp-
                  toms (307.-)

313.0 With anxiety and fearfulness
 Ill-defined emotional disorders characteristic of childhood in which the main symptoms
 involve anxiety and fearfulness. Many cases of school refusal or elective mutism might be
included here.
Overanxious reaction of childhood or adolescence
 Excludes: abnormal separation anxiety (309.2)
             anxiety states (300.0)
             hospitalism in children (309.8)
             phobic state (300.2)

313.1 With misery and unhappiness
Emotional disorders characteristic of childhood in which the main symptoms involve misery
and unhappiness. There may also be eating and sleep disturbances.
Excludes: depressive neurosis (300.4)

313.2 With sensitivity, shyness and social withdrawal
Emotional disorders characteristic of childhood in which the main symptoms involve sensi-
tivity, shyness, or social withdrawal. Some cases of elective mutism might be included here.


                                                    Historical Review, ICD-9 443

Withdrawing reaction of childhood or adolescence
Excludes: infantile autism (299.0)
             schizoid personality (301.2)
             schizophrenia (295.-)

313.3 Relationship problems
Emotional disorders characteristic of childhood in which the main symptoms involve rela-
tionship problems.
Sibling jealousy
 Excludes: relationship problems associated with aggression, destruction or
                other forms of conduct disturbance (312.-)

313.8 Other or mixed
Many emotional disorders of childhood include several elements but whenever possible a
specific coding under .0, .1, .2 or .3 should be made according to the preponderant type of
disturbance. The category of mixed disorders should only be used when there is such an
admixture that this cannot be done.

313.9 Unspecified

314 Hyperkinetic syndrome of childhood
Disorders in which the essential features are short attention span and dislractibility. In early
childhood the most striking symptom is disinhibited, poorly organized and poorly regulated
extreme overactivity but in adolescence this may be replaced by underactivity. Impulsiveness,
marked mood fluctuations and aggression are also common symptoms. Delays in the devel-
opment of specific skills are often present and disturbed, poor relationships are common.
If the hyperkinesis is symptomatic of an underlying disorder, code the underlying disorder
instead.

314.0 Simple disturbance of activity and attention
 Cases in which short attention span, distractibility, and overactivity are the main manifes-
tations without significant disturbance of conduct or delay in specific skills.
Overactivity NOS

314.1 Hyperkinesis with developmental delay
Cases in which the hyperkinetic syndrome is associated with speech delay, clumsiness,
reading difficulties or other delays in specific skills.
Developmental disorder of hyperkinesis
 Use additional code to identify any associated neurological disorder

314.2 Hyperkinetic conduct disorder
 Cases in which the hyperkinetic syndrome is associated with marked conduct disturbance
but not developmental delay.
Hyperkinetic conduct disorder
 Excludes: hyperkinesis with significant delays in specific skills (314.1)


444 Appendix D

314.
314.9 Unspecified
Hyperkinetic reaction of childhood Hyperkinetic syndrome NOS
    or adolescence NOS

315 Specific delays in development
A group of disorders in which a specific delay in development is the main feature. In each
case development is related to biological maturation but it is also influenced by nonbiological
factors and the coding carries no aetiological implications.
Excludes: when due to a neurological disorder (320-389)

315.0 Specific reading retardation
Disorders in which the main feature is a serious impairment in the development of reading
or spelling skills which is not explicable in terms of general intellectual retardation or of
inadequate schooling. Speech or language difficulties, impaired right-left differentiation,
perceptuo-motor problems, and coding difficulties are frequently associated. Similar problems
are often present in other members of the family. Adverse psychosocial factors may be
present.
Developmental dyslexia Specific spelling difficulty

315.1 Specific arithmetical retardation
Disorders in which the main feature is a serious impairment in the development of arith-
metical skills which is not explicable in terms of general intellectual retardation or of
inadequate schooling.
Dyscalculia

 315.2 Other specific learning difficulties
Disorders in which the main feature is a serious impairment in the development of other
learning skills which are not explicable in terms of general intellectual retardation or of
inadequate schooling.
Excludes: specific arithmetical retardation (315.1)
           specific reading retardation (315.0)

315.3 Developmental speech or language disorder
Disorders in which the main feature is a serious impairment in the development of speech
or language [syntax or semantics] which is not explicable in terms of general intellectual
retardation. Most commonly there is a delay in the development of normal word-sound
production resulting in defects of articulation. Omissions or substitutions of consonants are
most frequent. There may also be a delay in the production of spoken language. Rarely,
there is also a developmental delay in the comprehension of sounds. Includes cases in which
delay is largely due to environmental privation.
Developmental aphasia Dyslalia
Excludes: acquired aphasia (784.3)
           elective mutism (309.8, 313.0 or 313.2)
           lisping and lalling (307.9)
           stammering and stuttering (307.0)


                                             Historical Review, ICD-9 445

315.4 Specific motor retardation
Disorders in which the main feature is a serious impairment in the development of motor
coordination which is not explicable in terms of general intellectual retardation. The clumsi-
ness is commonly associated with perceptual difficulties.
Clumsiness syndrome Dyspraxia syndrome

 315.5 Mixed development disorder
A delay in the development of one specific skill [e.g., reading, arithmetic, speech or coordi-
nation] is frequently associated with lesser delays in other skills. When this occurs the
coding should be made according to the skill most seriously impaired. The mixed category
should be used only where the mixture of delayed skills is such that no one skill is
preponderantly affected.

315

 315.9 Unspecified
Developmental disorder NOS

316 Psychic factors associated with diseases classified elsewhere
Mental disturbances or psychic factors of any type thought to have played a major part in
the aetiology of physical conditions, usually involving tissue damage, classified elsewhere.
The mental disturbance is usually mild and nonspecific and psychic factors [worry, fear,
conflict, etc.] may be present without any overt psychiatric disorder. Use an additional code
to identify the physical condition. In the rare instance that an overt psychiatric disorder is
thought to have caused a physical condition, use a second additional code to record the
psychiatric diagnosis.
Examples of the use of this category are:
  psychogenic:
     asthma 316 and 493.9
     dermatitis 316 and 692.-
     eczema 316 and 691.- or 692.-
     gastric ulcer 316 and 531.-
     mucous colitis 316 and 564.1
    ulcerative colitis 316 and 556
    urticaria 316 and 708.-
  psychosocial dwarfism 316 and 259.4
Excludes: physical symptoms and physiological malfunctions, not involving
                tissue damage, of mental origin (306.-)

                       MENTAL RETARDATION (317-319)
A condition of arrested or incomplete development of mind which is especially characterized
by subnormality of intelligence. The coding should be made on the individual's current level
of functioning without regard to its nature or causation—such as psychosis, cultural depri-
vation, Down's syndrome etc. Where there is a specific cognitive handicap—such as in
speech—the four-digit coding should be based on assessments of cognition outside the area


446 Appendix D

 of specific handicap. The assessment of intellectual level should be based on whatever
 information is available, including clinical evidence, adaptive behaviour and psychometric
findings. The IQ levels given are based on a test with a mean of 100 and a standard devia-
tion of 15—such as the Wechsler scales. They are provided only as a guide and should not
be applied rigidly. Mental retardation often involves psychiatric disturbances and may often
develop as a result of some physical disease or injury. In these cases, an additional code or
codes should be used to identify any associated condition, psychiatric or physical. The
Impairment and Handicap codes should also be consulted.

 317 Mild mental retardation
 Feeble-minded Moron
High-grade defect IQ 50-70
Mild mental subnormality

 318 Other specific mental retardation
 318.0 Moderate mental retardation
 Imbecile Moderate mental subnormality
 IQ 35-49

 318.1 Severe mental retardation
 IQ 20-34 Severe mental subnormality

318.2 Profound mental retardation
Idiocy Profound mental subnormality
IQ under 20

 319 Unspecified mental retardation
 Mental deficiency NOS Mental subnormality NOS

        ICD-9-CM CLASSIFICATION OF MENTAL DISORDERS
                 (without inclusion and exclusion terms)
From The International Classification of Diseases, Clinical Modification, Ninth
Revision (ICD-9-CM), Commission on Professional and Hospital Activities,
Edwards Bros., Ann Arbor, MI, 1979.

    Italics indicate specific ICD-9-CM codes and their categories not included
in DSM-III. The lozenge symbol (n) printed in the left margin preceding the
disease code denotes a four-digit rubric unique to ICD-9-CM. The contents of
these rubrics in ICD-9-CM are not the same as those in ICD-9.

                   MENTAL DISORDERS (290-319)
                        PSYCHOSES (290-299)
            ORGANIC PSYCHOTIC CONDITIONS (290-294)
290 Senile and presenile organic psychotic conditions
    290.0 Senile dementia, uncomplicated


                                        Historical Review, ICD-9 447

    290.1 Presenile dementia
        290.10 Presenile dementia, uncomplicated
        290.11 Presenile dementia with delirium
        290.12 Presenile dementia with delusional features
        290.13 Presenile dementia with depressive features
    290.2 Senile dementia with delusional or depressive features
        290.20 Senile dementia with delusional features
        290.21 Senile dementia with depressive features
    290.3 Senile dementia with delirium
    290.4 Arteriosclerotic dementia
        290.40 Arteriosclerotic dementia, uncomplicated
        290.41 Arteriosclerotic dementia with delirium
        290.42 Arteriosclerotic dementia with delusional features
        290.43 Arteriosclerotic dementia with depressive features
    290.8 Other specified senile psychotic conditions
    290.9 Unspecified senile psychotic condition

291 Alcoholic psychoses
    291.0 Alcohol withdrawal delirium
    291.1 Alcohol amnestic syndrome
    291.2 Other alcoholic dementia
    291.3 Alcohol withdrawal hallucinosis
    291.4 Idiosyncratic alcohol intoxication
    291.5 Alcoholic jealousy
    291.8 Other specified alcoholic psychosis
    291.9 Unspecified alcoholic psychosis

292 Drug psychoses
    292.0 Drug withdrawal syndrome
    292.1 Paranoid and/or hallucinatory states induced by drugs
        292.11 Drug-induced organic delusional syndrome
        292.12 Drug-induced hallucinosis
    292.2 Pathological drug intoxication


448 Appendix D

     292.8 Other specified drug-induced mental disorders
        292.81 Drug-induced delirium
        292.82 Drug-induced dementia
        292.83 Drug-induced amnestic syndrome
        292.84 Drug-induced organic affective syndrome
         292.89 Other
     292.9 Unspecified drug-induced mental disorder

 293 Transient organic psychotic conditions
     293.0 Acute delirium
    293.1 Subacute delirium
     293.8 Other specified transient organic mental disorders
         293.81 Organic delusional syndrome
         293.82 Organic hallucinosis syndrome
         293.83 Organic affective syndrome
         293.89 Other
     293.9 Unspecified transient organic mental disorder

 294 Other organic psychotic conditions (chronic)
     294.0 Amnestic syndrome
     294.1 Dementia in conditions classified elsewhere
     294.8 Other specified organic brain syndromes (chronic)
     294.9 Unspecified organic brain syndrome (chronic)

                     OTHER PSYCHOSES (295-299)

 295 Schizophrenic disorders
     295.0 Simple type
     295.1 Disorganized type
     295.2 Catatonic type
     295.3 Paranoid type
     295.4 Acute schizophrenic episode
     295.5 Latent schizophrenia
     295.6 Residual schizophrenia
     295.7 Schizo-affective type
     295.8 Other specified types of schizophrenia
     295.9 Unspecified schizophrenia


                                        Historical Review, ICD-9 449

296 Affective psychoses
   D296.0 Manic disorder, single episode
   C296.1 Manic disorder, recurrent episode
   n296.2 Major depressive disorder, single episode
   °296.3 Major depressive disorder, recurrent episode
   D296.4 Bipolar affective disorder, manic
   D296.5 Bipolar affective disorder, depressed
   D296.6 Bipolar affective disorder, mixed
   D296.7 Bipolar affective disorder, unspecified
   D296.8 Manic-depressive psychosis, other and unspecified
        296.80 Manic-depressive psychosis, unspecified
        296.81 Atypical manic disorder
        296.82 Atypical depressive disorder
        296.89 Other
   I=I296.9 Other and unspecified affective psychoses
        296.90 Unspecified affective psychosis
        296.99 Other specified affective psychoses

297 Paranoid states
    297.0 Paranoid state, simple
    297.1 Paranoia
    297.2 Paraphrenia
    297.3 Shared paranoid disorder
    297.8 Other specified paranoid states
    297.9 Unspecified paranoid state

298 Other nonorganic psychoses
    298.0 Depressive type psychosis
    298.1 Excitative type psychosis
    298.2 Reactive confusion
    298.3 Acute paranoid reaction
    298.4 Psychogenic paranoid psychosis
    298.8 Other and unspecified reactive psychosis
    298.9 Unspecified psychosis

299 Psychoses with origin specific to childhood
    299.0 Infantile autism


450 Appendix D

    299.1 Disintegrative psychosis
    299.8 Other specified early childhood psychoses
    299.9 Unspecified

      NEUROTIC DISORDERS, PERSONALITY DISORDERS, AND
       OTHER NONPSYCHOTIC MENTAL DISORDERS (300-316)
 300 Neurotic disorders
    300.0 Anxiety states
        300.00 Anxiety state, unspecified
        300.01 Panic disorder
        300.02 Generalized anxiety disorder
        300.09 Other
     300.1 Hysteria
        300.10 Hysteria, unspecified
        300.11 Conversion disorder
         300.12 Psychogenic amnesia
        300.13 Psychogenic fugue
         300.14 Multiple personality
         300.15 Dissociative disorder or reaction, unspecified
         300.16 Factitious illness with psychological symptoms
         300.19 Other and unspecified factitious illness
     300.2 Phobic disorders
         300.20 Phobia, unspecified
         300.21 Agoraphobia with panic attacks
         300.22 Agoraphobia without mention of panic attacks
         300.23 Social phobia
         300.29 Other isolated or simple phobias
     300.3 Obsessive-compulsive disorders
     300.4 Neurotic depression
     300.5 Neurasthenia
     300.6 Depersonalization syndrome
     300.7 Hypochondriasis
     300.8 Other neurotic disorders
         300.81 Somatization disorder
         300.89 Other
     300.9 Unspecified neurotic disorder


                                        Historical Review, ICD-9 451

301 Personality disorders
    301.0 Paranoid personality disorder
    301.1 Affective personality disorder
        301.10 Affective personality disorder, unspecified
        301.11 Chronic hypomanic personality disorder
        301.12 Chronic depressive personality disorder
        301.13 Cyclothymic disorder
    301.2 Schizoid personality disorder
        301.20 Schizoid personality disorder, unspecified
        301.21 Introverted personality
        301.22 Schizotypal personality
    301.3 Explosive personality disorder
    301.4 Compulsive personality disorder
    301.5 Histrionic personality disorder
        301.50 Histrionic personality disorder, unspecified
        301.51 Chronic factitious illness with physical symptoms
        301.59 Other histrionic personality disorder
    301.6 Dependent personality disorder
    301.7 Antisocial personality disorder
    301.8 Other personality disorders
        301.81 Narcissistic personality
        301.82 Avoidant personality
        301.83 Borderline personality
        301.84 Passive-aggressive personality
        301.89 Other
    301.9 Unspecified personality disorder

302 Sexual deviations and disorders
    302.0 Homosexuality
    302.1 Zoophilia
    302.2 Pedophilia
    302.3 Tranvestism
    302.4 Exhibitionism
    302.5 Trans-sexualism


452 Appendix D

     302.6 Disorders of psychosexual identity
     302.7 Psychosexual dysfunction
        302.70 Psychosexual dysfunction, unspecified
        302.71 With inhibited sexual desire
         302.72 With inhibited sexual excitement
         302.73 With inhibited female orgasm
         302.74 With inhibited male orgasm
         302.75 With premature ejaculation
         302.76 With functional dyspareunia
         302.79 With other specified psychosexual dysfunctions
     302.8 Other specified psychosexual disorders
         302.81 Fetishism
         302.82 Voyeurism
         302.83 Sexual masochism
         302.84 Sexual sadism
         302.85 Gender identity disorder of adolescent or adult life
         302.89 Other
     302.9 Unspecified psychosexual disorder

 303 Alcohol dependence syndrome
     303.0 Acute alcoholic intoxication
     303.9 Other and unspecified alcohol dependence

 304 Drug dependence
     304.0 Opioid type dependence
     304.1 Barbiturate and similarly acting sedative or hypnotic dependence
     304.2 Cocaine dependence
     304.3 Cannabis dependence
     304.4 Amphetamine and other psychostimulant dependence
     304.5 Hallucinogen dependence
     304.6 Other specified drug dependence
     304.7 Combinations of opioid type drug with any other
     304.8 Combinations of drug dependence excluding opioid type drug


                                        Historical Review, ICD-9 453

    304.9 Unspecified drug dependence

305 Nondependent abuse of drugs
    305.0 Alcohol abuse
    305.1 Tobacco use disorder
    305.2 Cannabis abuse
    305.3 Hallucinogen abuse
    305.4 Barbiturate and similarly acting sedative or hypnotic abuse
    305.5 Opioid abuse
    305.6 Cocaine abuse
    305.7 Amphetamine or related acting sympathomimetic abuse
    305.8 Antidepressant type abuse
    305.9 Other, mixed, or unspecified drug abuse

306 Physiological malfunction arising from mental factors
    306.0 Musculoskeletal
    306.1 Respiratory
    306.2 Cardiovascular
    306.3 Skin
    306.4 Gastrointestinal
    306.5 Genitourinary
        306.50 Psychogenic genitourinary malfunction, unspecified
        306.51 Psychogenic vaginismus
        306.52 Psychogenic dysmenorrhea
        306.53 Psychogenic dysuria
        306.59 Other
    306.6 Endocrine
    306.7 Organs of special sense
    306.8 Other specified psychophysiological malfunction
    306.9 Unspecified psychophysiological malfunction

307 Special symptoms or syndromes, not elsewhere classified
    307.0 Stammering and stuttering
    307.1 Anorexia nervosa


454 Appendix D

    307.2 Tics
        307.20 Tic disorder, unspecified
        307.21 Transient tic disorder of childhood
        307.22 Chronic motor tic disorder
        307.23 Gilles de la Tourette's disorder
    307.3 Stereotyped repetitive movements
     307.4 Specific disorders of sleep of nonorganic origin
        307.40 Nonorganic sleep disorder, unspecified
        307.41 Transient disorder of initiating or maintaining sleep
         307.42 Persistent disorder of initiating or maintaining sleep
         307.43 Transient disorder of initiating or maintaining wakefulness
         307.44 Persistent disorder of initiating or maintaining wakefulness
         307.45 Phase-shift disruption of 24-hour sleep-wake cycle
         307.46 Somnambulism or night terrors
         307.47 Other dysfunctions of sleep stages or arousal from sleep
         307.45 Repetitive intrusions of sleep
         307.49 Other
     307.5 Other and unspecified disorders of eating
         307.50 Eating disorder, unspecified
         307.51 Bulimia
         307.52 Pica
         307.53 Psychogenic rumination
         307.54 Psychogenic vomiting
         307.59 Other
     307.6 Enuresis
     307.7 Encopresis
     307.8 Psychalgia
         307.80 Psychogenic pain, site unspecified
         307.81 Tension headache
         307.89 Other
     307.9 Other and unspecified special symptoms or syndromes, not else-
            where classified


                                        Historical Review, ICD-9 455

308 Acute reaction to stress
    308.0 Predominant disturbance of emotions
    308.1 Predominant disturbance of consciousness
    308.2 Predominant psychomotor disturbance
    308.3 Other acute reactions to stress
    308.4 Mixed disorders as reaction to stress
    308.9 Unspecified acute reaction to stress

309 Adjustment reaction
    309.0 Brief depressive reaction
    309.1 Prolonged depressive reaction
    309.2 With predominant disturbance of other emotions
        309.21 Separation anxiety disorder
        309.22 Emancipation disorder of adolescence and early adult life
        309.23 Specific academic or work inhibition
        309.24 Adjustment reaction with anxious mood
        309.28 Adjustment reaction with mixed emotional features
        309.29 Other
    309.3 With predominant disturbance of conduct
    309.4 With mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct
    309.8 Other specified adjustment reactions
        309.81 Prolonged posttraumatic stress disorder
        309.82 Adjustment reaction with physical symptoms
        309.83 Adjustment reaction with withdrawal
        309.89 Other
    309.9 Unspecified adjustment reaction

 310 Specific nonpsychotic mental disorders due to organic brain damage
    320.0 Frontal lobe syndrome
     310.1 Organic personality syndrome
     310.2 Postconcussion syndrome
     310.8 Other specified nonpsychotic mental disorders following organic
           brain damage


456 Appendix D

    310.9 Unspecified nonpsychotic mental disorder following organic brain
           damage

311 Depressive disorder, not elsewhere classified

312 Disturbance of conduct, not elsewhere classified

   D312.0 Undersocialized conduct disorder, aggressive type
   D312.1 Undersocialized conduct disorder, unaggressive type
   n312.2 Socialized conduct disorder
   n312.3 Disorders of impulse control, not elsewhere classified
        312.30 Impulse control disorder, unspecified
        312.31 Pathological gambling
        312.32 Kleptomania
        312.33 Pyromania
        312.34 Intermittent explosive disorder
        312.35 Isolated explosive disorder
        312.39 Other
   ^312.4 Mixed disturbance of conduct and emotions
     312.8 Other specified disturbances of conduct, not elsewhere classified
     312.9 Unspecified disturbance of conduct

 313 Disturbance of emotions specific to childhood and adolescence
     313.0 Overanxious disorder
     313.1 Misery and unhappiness disorder
     313.2 Sensitivity, shyness, and social withdrawal disorder
         313.21 Shyness disorder of childhood
         313.22 Introverted disorder of childhood
         313.23 Elective mutism
     313.3 Relationship problems
     313.8 Other or mixed emotional disturbances of childhood or adolescence
         313.81 Oppositional disorder
         313.82 Identity disorder
         313.83 Academic underachievement disorder
         313.89 Other
     313.9 Unspecified emotional disturbance of childhood or adolescence


                                         Historical Review, ICD-9 457

314 Hyperkinetic syndrome of childhood
    314.0 Attention deficit disorder
        314.00 Without mention of hyperactivity
        314.01 With hyperactivity
    314.1 Hyperkinesis with developmental delay
    314.2 Hyperkinetic conduct disorder
    314.8 Other specified manifestations of hyperkinetic syndrome
    314.9 Unspecified hyperkinetic syndrome

315 Specific delays in development
    315.0 Specific reading disorder
        315.00 Reading disorder, unspecified
        315.01 Alexia
        315.02 Developmental dyslexia
        315.09 Other
    315.1 Specific arithmetical disorder
    315.2 Other specific learning difficulties
    315.3 Developmental speech or language disorder
        315.31 Developmental language disorder
        315.39 Other
    325.4 Coordination disorder
    315.5 Mixed development disorder
    315.8 Other specified delays in development
    315.9 Unspecified delay in development

316 Psychic factors associated with diseases classified elsewhere

                 MENTAL RETARDATION (317-319)

317 Mild mental retardation
318 Other specified mental retardation
    318.0 Moderate mental retardation
    318.1 Severe mental retardation
    318.2 Profound mental retardation

319 Unspecified mental retardation


This page intentionally left blank 


          Appendix E


      The Diagnostic
 Classification of Sleep
and Arousal Disorders*


This page intentionally left blank 


                                                                              A, f^fiixintftfv INS*
     The Diagnostic Classification of
             Sleep and Arousal Disorders
                                               of the
                          Association of Sleep Disorders Centers
                                              and the
                Association for the Psychophysiological Study of Sleep

 A. DIMS: DISORDERS OF INITIATING AND MAINTAINING SLEEP
     (Insomnias)
     1. Psychophysiological
          a. Transient and Situational
          b. Persistent

     2. associated with
          Psychiatric Disorders
          a. Symptom and Personality Disorders
         b. Affective Disorders
          c. Other Functional Psychoses

     3. associated with
         Use of Drugs and Alcohol
         a. Tolerance to or Withdrawal from CNS Depressants
         b. Sustained Use of CNS Stimulants
         c. Sustained Use of or Withdrawal from Other Drugs
         d. Chronic Alcoholism

     4. associated with
         Sleep-Induced Respiratory Impairment
         a. Sleep Apnea DIMS Syndrome
         b. Alveolar Hypoventilation DIMS Syndrome


* Prepared by the Sleep Disorders Classification Committee of the Association of Sleep Disorders
Centers: Howard P. Roffwarg, M.D. (Chair), Robert W. Clark, M.D., Christian Guilleminault, M.D.,
Peter J. Hauri, Ph.D., David J. Kupfer, M.D., Laughton E. Miles, M.D., Ph.D., Helmut S. Schmidt, M.D.,
Vincent P. Zarcone, Jr., M.D., and Frank J. Zorick, M.D. with William C. Dement, M.D., Ph.D. and
Allan Rechtschaffen, Ph.D. as consultants. This is an outline of the first diagnostic classification syste
endorsed by both national sleep investigator societies. It represents a major consensus in the sleep
disorders field. As published in Sleep, Volume 2, Number 1, 1979, published by Raven Press, the
classification system contains a detailed description of each condition, differential diagnosis, back-
ground material, references, and a glossary.

                                                461


462 Appendix E

   5. associated with
      Sleep-related (Nocturnal) Myoclonus and "Restless Legs" Syndromes
      a. Sleep-related (Nocturnal) Myoclonus
      b. "Restless Legs"
   6. associated with
      Other Medical, Toxic, and Environmental Conditions
    7. Childhood Onset DIMS
   8. associated with
       Other DIMS Conditions
       a. Repeated REMS Interruptions
      b. Atypical Polysomnographic Features
       c. Not Otherwise Specified
    9. No DIMS Abnormality
       a. Short Sleeper
       b. Subjective DIMS Complaints without Objective Findings
       c. Not Otherwise Specified


 B. DOES: DISORDERS OF EXCESSIVE SOMNOLENCE

     1. Psychophysiological
        a. Transient and Situational
        b. Persistent
     2. associated with
        Psychiatric Disorders
        a. Affective Disorders
        b. Other Disorders
     3. associated with
        Use of Drugs and Alcohol
        a. Tolerance to or Withdrawal from CNS Stimulants
        b. Sustained Use of CNS Depressants
     4. Sleep-Induced Respiratory Impairment
        a. Sleep Apnea DOES Syndrome
        b. Alveolar Hypoventilation DOES Syndrome


                                     Sleep and Arousal Disorders 463

    5. associated with
       Sleep-related (Nocturnal) Myoclonus and "Restless Legs" Syndromes
       a. Sleep-related (Nocturnal) Myoclonus
       b. "Restless Legs"
    6. Narcolepsy
    7. Idiopathic CNS Hypersomnolence
    8. associated with
       Other Medical, Toxic, and Environmental Conditions
    9. Other DOES Conditions
       a. Intermittent DOES (Periodic) Syndromes
          i. Kleine-Levin Syndrome
          ii. Menstrual Associated Syndrome
       b. Insufficient Sleep
       c. Disorder of Initiating Wakefulness (Sleep Drunkenness)
       d. Not Otherwise Specified
   10. No DOES Abnormality
       a. Long Sleeper
       b. Subjective DOES Complaint without Objective Findings
       c. Not Otherwise Specified


C. DISORDERS OF THE SLEEP-WAKE SCHEDULE

   1. Transient
      a. Rapid Time Zone Change ("Jet Lag") Syndrome
      b. "Workshift" Change in Conventional Sleep-Wake Schedule
   2. Persistent
      a. Frequently Changing Sleep-Wake Schedule
      b. Delayed Sleep Phase Syndrome
      c. Advanced Sleep Phase Syndrome
      d. Non-24-Hour Sleep-Wake Schedule
      e. Irregular Sleep-Wake Pattern
      f. Not Otherwise Specified


464 Appendix E

D. DYSFUNCTIONS ASSOCIATED WITH SLEEP, SLEEP STAGES, OR
   PARTIAL AROUSALS (PARASOMNIAS)

   1. Sleepwalking (Somnambulism)
   2. Sleep Terror (Pavor Nocturnus, Incubus)
   3. Sleep-related Enuresis
   4. Other Dysfunctions
      a. Dream Anxiety Attacks (Nightmares)
      b. Sleep-related Epileptic Seizures
      c. Sleep-related Bruxism
      d. Sleep-related Headbanging (Jactatio Capitus Nocturnus)
      e. Familial Sleep Paralysis
      f. Impaired Penile Tumescence during Sleep
      g. Sleep-related Painful Erections
      h. Sleep-related Cluster Headaches and Chronic Paroxysmal Hemicrania
      i. Sleep-related Abnormal Swallowing Syndrome
      j. Sleep-related Asthma
      k. Sleep-related Cardiovascular Symptoms
      1. Sleep-related Gastro-Esophageal Reflux
      m. Sleep-related Hemolysis (Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria)
      n. Asymptomatic Polysomnographic Finding (specify condition)
       o. Not Otherwise Specified


         Appendix F


 DSM-III Field Trials:
 Interrater Reliability
  and List of Project
Staff and Participants


This page intentionally left blank 


                                                    AppendixF:
     DSM-III Field Trials: Interrater
        Reliability ando fList
                        Staff and Participants


 NIMH-SPONSORED FIELD TRIAL: INTERRATER RELIABILITY*

 An important step in the development of DSM-III has been a series of field
 trials using draft versions of the manual. After two pilot field trial projects in
 which the earliest drafts of DSM-III were used, a formal two-year field trial,
 using later and more definitive drafts and sponsored by the Division of Biometry
 and Epidemiology of the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), began in
 September 1977.
    We here present a brief description of the NIMH-sponsored field trial and
 the interrater reliability obtained on each of the five axes. In this trial the
1/15/78 draft of DSM-III was used for Phase One supplemented by a set of
revised criteria prepared for Phase Two. A list of the project staff and all the
clinicians who participated in the field trials is included.

Method

Clinicians were invited to participate in the field trial through notices appear-
 ing in Psychiatric News and other mental health publications and by letters sent
 to the membership of the American Academy of Child Psychiatry. All who
 agreed to complete the required work were accepted as participants, either as
private practitioners or as groups of clinicians working within facilities. The
 clinicians were from all parts of the country, from Maine to Hawaii, and worked
in both rural and urban settings. Over 75% identified their main professional
activity as evaluation or care of patients. The rest were engaged in administra-
 tion (6%), teaching (7%), or research (6%).
    Only clinicians who joined in groups participated in the reliability study.
Each of these clinicians was asked to participate in at least four reliability evalua-
tions with another clinician. (Most of the clinicians evaluated four patients each;
some evaluated only one, and a few evaluated many.) These four assessments
were to be done after each clinician had already had experience using the DSM-
III draft to evaluate at least 15 patients selected from their patient population
either as consecutive admissions or on a catch-as-catch-can basis (an approxima-
 tion of the ideal of random sampling). Each individual was evaluated on each of
 the five axes. The reliability interviews, with only a few exceptions, were initial
diagnostic evaluations before treatment was initiated.

*Prepared by Janet B.W. Williams, M.S.W. and Robert L. Spitzer, M.D., and adapted in part from:
Spilzer RL, Forman JBW, Nee J: DSM-III field trials: I. Initial interrater diagnostic reliability. Am J
 Psychiatry 136:815-817, 1979; and Spitzer RL, Forman JBW: DSM-III field trials: II. Initial experience
with the multiaxial system. Am J Psychiatry 136:818-820, 1979.

                                467


468 Appendix F

    Detailed instructions were given to the clinicians to avoid possible biases. For
 example, they were cautioned not to choose cases specifically because they pre-
 sented no differential diagnostic problems or to discuss a case before each clini-
 cian had independently filled out the diagnostic forms. The participants were re-
 minded that DSM-III was on trial—not they—and that they should not hesitate
 to send in their results, even if there was poor agreement.
     The two clinicians evaluating the same individual were to have access to
 the same material, such as case records, letters of referral, nursing notes, and
 family informants. If one clinician had such information (e.g., spoke to a family
 member), he or she was to inform the other clinician of the additional informa-
 tion, but avoid communicating his or her diagnostic impression. The two clini-
 cians could either be present at the same evaluation interview or arrange to do
 separate evaluations as close together in time as possible. In Phase One, approxi-
 mately 60% of adult as well as child and adolescent diagnostic assessments were
 done in separate evaluations, and in Phase Two about two-thirds of all evalua-
 tions were done separately. Approximately 300 clinicians evaluated a total of
 670 adult patients (18 years and older). Approximately 84 clinicians evaluated a
 total of 126 child and adolescent patients, approximately half of whom were
 below the age of eleven.

 Results

 The interrater reliability from Phase One and Phase Two, for the diagnostic
 classes and subclasses that were represented in the patient sample, is presented
 in Table 1 (adults) and Table 2 (children and adolescents). Reliability is expressed
 using the kappa statistic, which indexes chance-corrected agreement (1). A high
 kappa (generally 0.7 and above) indicates good agreement as to whether or not
 the patient has a disorder within that diagnostic class, even if there is dis-
 agreement about the specific disorder within the class. For example, diagnoses of
 Schizophrenia, Paranoid Type and Schizophrenia, Catatonic Type by two clini-
 cians would be considered agreement on Schizophrenia. Similarly, if one clinician
 diagnoses Borderline Personality Disorder and the other Schizotypal Personality
 Disorder, this is considered agreement on whether or not there is a Personality
 Disorder. The overall kappa for the major classes of Axis I indicates the extent
 to which there is agreement across all diagnostic classes for all patients given an
 Axis I diagnosis by at least one of the clinicians, and is thus an overall index of
 diagnostic agreement.
     For adult patients, the reliability for most of the classes in both phases is
 quite good, and in general higher than that previously achieved with DSM-I and
 DSM-II (2). It is particularly encouraging that the reliability for such important
 categories as Schizophrenia and Major Affective Disorders is so high.
     It is also noteworthy that the reliability in general improved in Phase Two,
 perhaps due to the refinements in the criteria used in Phase Two. Although
 Personality Disorder as a class is evaluated more reliably than previously, with
 the exception of Antisocial Personality Disorder (kappa 0.87 and 0.65 in Phase
 One and Phase Two respectively), the kappas for the specific Personality Dis-
 orders are quite low and range from 0.26 to 0.75.


                                            DSM-III Field Trials 469

    The overall reliability of the diagnostic classes for children and adolescents
(Table 2) in Phase One was the same as that for adults. However, the reliabilities
in Phase Two tended to be lower than in Phase One, for reasons that are
not clear. This was particularly the case for Adjustment Disorder, a diagnostic
category given to nearly a third of the cases. Although the reliability ob-
tained using the DSM-III classification with children and adolescents is only
fair, it is still far higher than that obtained using the classification developed for
use with children by a committee of the Group for the Advancement of Psychia-
try (3).
    Table 3 presents the intraclass reliability coefficients for Axes IV and V for
children and adolescents and for adults. The reliability of the assessment of the
severity of psychosocial stressors is at least fair. The reliability of the assess-
ment of the highest level of adaptive functioning past year is generally quite
good. As with the interjudge diagnostic reliability, the coefficients of reliability
are higher with the adults in Phase Two than in Phase One, but are lower with
children and adolescents.
    Several innovative features of DSM-III have undoubtedly contributed to the
generally improved diagnostic reliability: changes in the classification itself (e.g.,
grouping all of the Affective Disorders together), the separation of Axis I and
Axis II conditions, the systematic description of the various disorders and,
finally, the inclusion of diagnostic criteria.

                           REFERENCES

1. Spitzer RL, Cohen }, Fleiss JL, et al: Br J Psychiatry 125:341-347, 1974
  Quantification of agreement in psychiatric 3. Beitchman JH, Dielman TE, Landis JR, et
  diagnosis: A new approach. Arch Gen al: Reliability of the Group for the Ad-
  Psychiatry 17:83-87, 1967 vancement of Psychiatry diagnostic cate-
2. Spitzer RL and Fleiss JL: A re-analysis gories in child psychiatry. Arch Gen
  of the reliability of psychiatric diagnosis. Psychiatry 35:1461-1468, 1978


470 Appendix F

                                 TABLE 1
  KAPPA COEFFICIENTS OF AGREEMENT FOR AXES I AND II DSM-III
         DIAGNOSTIC CLASSES FOR ADULTS (18 AND OLDER)
                                         Phase One           Phase Two
                                         (N = 339)            (N = 331)
AXIS I                                            %of                 %of
DISORDERS USUALLY FIRST EVIDENT                  Sample              Sample
 IN INFANCY, CHILDHOOD OR
 ADOLESCENCE                         .65          5.3%   .73 3.6%
 Mental Retardation                       .80 1.5%             .83 2.1%
 Attention Deficit Disorder                                  — .003 0.6%
 Conduct Disorder                                            — .003 0.6%
  Other Disorders of Infancy, Childhood
   or Adolescence                         .66 1.2%             .002 0.3%
 Eating Disorders                         .59 2.1%
  Stereotyped Movement Disorders         — .001 0.3%
 Other Disorders with Physical
   Manifestations                                             1.00 0.6%
ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS             .79         11.8%   .76 10.0%
 Dementias arising in the senium and
   presenium                              .85 2.4%             .91 1.8%
 Substance-induced                        .63 7.4%             .58 3.6%
  OBS of Other or Unknown Etiology . .    .66 4.1%             .65 5.4%
SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS              .86         21.2%   .80 21.2%
SCHIZOPHRENIC DISORDERS              .81         17.7%   .81 23.3%
PARANOID DISORDERS                   .66          1.2%   .75 1.5%
PSYCHOTIC DISORDERS NOT
 ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED                .64         11.2%   .69 6.7%
AFFECTIVE DISORDERS                  .69         43.1%   .83 38.7%
  Major Affective Disorders               .68 28.9%            .80 26.9%
  Other Specific Affective Disorders      .49 18.3%            .69 12.4%
 Atypical Affective Disorders             .29 3.2%             .49 3.6%
ANXIETY DISORDERS                    .63          9.1%   .72 8.8%
SOMATOFORM DISORDERS                 .54          3.8%   .42 3.3%
DISSOCIATIVE DISORDERS              .80           0.9%  — .003 0.6%
PSYCHOSEXUAL DISORDERS               .92          2.1%   .75 1.5%
  Gender Identity Disorders             — .001 0.3%          — .002 0.3%
  Paraphilias                             1.0 0.6%
  Psychosexual Dysfunctions               1.0 1.5%             .86 1.2%
FACTITIOUS DISORDERS                 .66          1.2%  — .005 0.9%
DISORDERS OF IMPULSE CONTROL
  NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED           .28          1.8%   .80 1.8%
ADJUSTMENT DISORDER                  .67         12.1%   .68 8.5%
PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS AFFECT-
  ING PHYSICAL CONDITION             .62          3.2%   .44 2.1%
V CODES                              .56          3.0%   .66 3.0%
ADDITIONAL CODES                   — .003         0.6%   .28 1.8%
OVERALL KAPPA FOR AXIS I             .68                 .72
AXIS II
Specific Developmental Disorders                               .40 1.2%
PERSONALITY DISORDERS                .56         59.9%   .65 49.8%
OVERALL KAPPA FOR AXIS II            .56                 .64


                                                          DSM-III Field Trials 471

                                      TABLE 2
   KAPPA COEFFICIENTS OF AGREEMENT FOR AXES I AND II DSM-III
 DIAGNOSTIC CLASSES FOR CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS (UNDER 18)
                                                Phase One              Phase Two
                                                 (N = 71)               (N = 55)
 AXIS I                                                  % of                    %of
DISORDERS USUALLY FIRST EVIDENT                         Sample                  Sample
   IN INFANCY, CHILDHOOD OR
  ADOLESCENCE 69                                         54.9%    .63 67.3%
   Mental Retardation                           1.0 8.5%                1.0 3.6%
  Attention Deficit Disorder                     .58 15.5%               .50 14.6%
   Conduct Disorder                              .61 26.8%               .61 38.2%
  Anxiety Disorders of Childhood or
     Adolescence                                 .25 8.5%                .44 16.4%
   Other Disorders of Infancy, Childhood
     or Adolescence                              .79 8.5%                .73 9.1%
   Eating Disorders                              .66 2.8%               1.0 3.6%
   Stereotyped Movement Disorders               1.0 1.4%
  Other Disorders with Physical
    Manifestations                                                       .48 5.5%
   Pervasive Developmental Disorders . . .       .85 5.6%              — .01 1.8%
ORGANIC MENTAL DISORDERS                                           .66 3.6%
  Substance-induced                                                    -.01 1.8%
   OBS of Other or Unknown Etiology                                     1.0 1.8%
SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS 1.0                               5.6%    .54 9.1%
SCHIZOPHRENIC DISORDERS 1.0                               5.6%     .66 3.6%
PSYCHOTIC DISORDERS NOT
   ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED 85                                5.6%
AFFECTIVE DISORDERS 53                                   16.9%    .30 9.1%
  Major Affective Disorders                      .36 11.3%             — .02 3.6%
  Other Specific Affective Disorders             .38 5.6%              — .02 3.6%
   Atypical Affective Disorders                — .01 2.8%               1.0 1.8%
ANXIETY DISORDERS 1.0                                     2.8%   1.0 1.8%
 SOMATOFORM DISORDERS 1.0                                 1.4%   — .009 1.8%
 PSYCHOSEXUAL DISORDERS 1.0                               1.4%
   Paraphilias                                  1.0 1.4%
 DISORDERS OF IMPULSE CONTROL .66                         2.8%
  NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED
 ADJUSTMENT DISORDER 66                                  31.0%    .36 32.7%
PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS AFFECT- -.01                        1.4%  — .02 3.6%
  ING PHYSICAL CONDITION
 V CODES -.02                                             4.2%     .54 9.1%
 ADDITIONAL CODES 1.0                                     1.4%  — .03 5.5%
 OVERALL KAPPA FOR AXIS I 68                                      .52
 AXIS II
 Specific Developmental Disorders                .77 22.5%               .51 29.1%
 PERSONALITY DISORDERS 56                                26.8%     .61 18.2%
 OVERALL KAPPA FOR AXIS II 66                                     .55


472 Appendix F

                                     TABLE 3
         INTRACLASS RELIABILITY COEFFICIENTS FOR DSM-III
                         AXES IV AND V (N in italics)

                                                                     Children and
                                                Adults Adolescents
                                         Phase One Phase Two Phase One Phase Two
Axis IV
Severity of Psychosocial Stressors 0.60 (308) 0.66 (293) 0.75 (69) 0.59 (53)

Axis V
Highest Level of Adaptive Functioning
  Past Year 0.75 (321) 0.80 (316) 0.77 (67) 0.52 (53)


                                                          DSM-lll Field Trials 473

PROJECT STAFF                                Frances Davey, Graphics Composer
                                             Lynn Sorensen, Computer Programmer
 Robert L. Spitzer, M.D., Principal          Rosalinda Martinez, Data Processing
   Investigator                              Nancy Minneker, Data Processing
Janet B. W. Williams, M.5.W., Co-principal   Sarah Lichtenstaedter, Data Processing
  Investigator and Project Coordinator       Harriet Ayers, Secretary
John Nee, Ph.D., Statistical Consultant and  Marie Junger, Secretary
  Computer Programmer                        Anne Keating, Secretary
Steven Hyler, M.D., Research Psychiatrist
Jean Endicott, Ph.D., Consultant
Lawrence Sharpe, M.D., Research Psychiatrist Carl Taube, Project Officer, Division of
Robert Simon, M.A., Research Scientist        Biometry and Epidemiology, National
Clare Mori, Research Assistant                Institute of Mental Health

 PARTICIPANTS IN FACILITIES (COORDINATORS LISTED FIRST)

Addiction-Prevention, Treatment Foundation, Blue Hills Hospital, Hartford, CT
  New Haven, CT                             Harvey Ruben, M.D.
Bruce J. Rounsaville, M.D.                  William Alder, M.D.
                                            Marshall Cohen, M.S.W.
Adult and Child Guidance Clinic, San Jose,  Jack Hirschowitz, M.D.
  CA                                        John Rosell, Ph.D.
Donald Charlesworth, M.A.
Lawrence Reeve, M.S.                        Boston Veterans Administration Hospital,
Arizona Health Sciences Center, Tuscon, AZ    Boston, MA
John Lawall, M.D.                           Robert Mayer, M.D.
Robert Cutts, M.D.                          Chester Pearlman, M.D.
                                            Jerome Sashin, M.D.
Aurora Community Mental Health Center,
  Aurora, CO                                The Bradley Center, Inc., Columbus, GA
Ellen Cashman Bustos, Ph.D.                 George Zubowicz, M.D.
Frank Bennett, Ph.D.                        Robert Clayton, D.O.
Delia Esparza, R.N., M.S.                   H. W. Wallner, M.D.
Jerry Hashimoto, M.S.W.
Kathryn Jens, Ph.D.                         Brawner Psychiatric Institute, Smyrna, GA
Jane Marder, A.C.S.W.                       Mark A. Gould, M.D.
Jim Newman, M.S.W.                          Ronald Milstone, M.D.
John Shethar, Ph.D.
Eugene Schwartz, Ph.D.                      Brentwood V.A. Hospital, Los Angeles, CA
Julie Wilson, A.R.T.                        S.Y. Tsai, M.D.
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
David Krueger, M.D.                         Brenwest Psychiatry Ltd., Phoenix, AZ
                                            William Sheeley, M.D.
Bedford-Stuyvesant CMHC, Brooklyn, NY       Robert Meyer, M.D.
Ursula Thunberg, M.D.
                                            Bronx Municipal Hospital, Children's
Bellevue Psychiatric Hospital, New York, NY   Inpatient Psychiatric Service, Bronx, NY
Peter Micheels, M.A.                        Jerome H. Liebowitz, M.D.
Anthony R. Gabriel, M.D.                    Ann Benham, M.D.
John Graham, M.D.                           Arden Rothstein, Ph.D.
Berkshire Farm Center and Services for
  Youth, Canaan, NY                         Buffalo Psychiatric Center, Buffalo, NY
David Resnik, A.C.S.W.                      Josie L. Olympia, M.D.
Susan Abagnale, A.C.S.W.                    Dong Yup Shim, M.D.
James Milton Bell, M.D.
                                            Camarillo Hospital, UCLA Neuropsychiatric
Beth Israel Medical Center, New York, NY      Inst., Mental Health Clinical Research
Henry Pinsker, M.D.                           Center, Camarillo, CA
Robert Halem, M.D.                          Ian Falloon, M.B., D.P.M.
Alan Levy, M.D.                             Simon Jones, M.D.
Alfred Sporn, M.D.                          Robert Liberman, M.D.


474 Appendix F

The Cambridge Hospital, Cambridge, MA Children's Service Center of Wyoming
J. Christopher Perry, M.D., M.P.H.      Valley, Inc., Wilkes Barre, PA
Melissa Bell, A.B.                    David A. Kahn, M.D.
Esther Howes, B.S.N., M.S.
Steven Kemble, M.D.                   Chippenham Hospital, Richmond, VA
Joseph McCabe, M.D.                   Graenum Schiff, M.D.
Mariann Monteleone, B.S.N.            Michael Fielding, Ph.D.
Molly Putnam, A.B.                    William Kernodle, M.D.
Katherine Quinn, M.D.                 Burwell Vaden, Ed.D.
Richard Randall, A.B.
Ellen Sinnott, B.S.N.                 Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH
Ronald Welch, M.D.                    Enrique Huerta, M.D.
                                      Meir Gross, M.D.
The Carrier Clinic, Belle Mead, NJ
A. Arthur Sugerman, M.D.              Commonwealth Psychiatric Center,
Daniel M. Greenwald, M.D.               Richmond, VA
Buel Grow, M.D.                        William Lordi, M.D.
Ali Zomorodi, M.D.
Central Bergen CMHC, Paramus, NJ      Community Guidance Center of Bexar
Aristide H. Esser, M.D.                 County, San Antonio, TX
Richard L. Rubens, Ph.D.              Kenneth Lee Matthews, M.D.
                                      Don D. Howe, M.D.
Centre Hospitaller Sainte-Anne, Paris, France Graham Rogeness, M.D.
Centre Hospitalier De Luxembourg, France
Pierre Pichot, M.D.                   Consultation Guidance Center, Silver Spring,
Patrice Boyer, M.D.                     MD
Michael Delcros, M.D.                 Harvey Sweetbaum, Ph.D.
Jeanne Hassan, M.D.                   Irving Raifman, Ph.D.
Alain Thibault, M.D.
                                      Craig House, Beacon, NY
Charlotte Hungerford Hospital, Mental Judith Gavlick, R.N.
 Health Center, Torrington, CT        C. L. Bennett, M.D.
Carlos R. Santiago y Ruiz De Porras, M.D. Jonathan Slocum, M.D.
Abigail H. Bogie, A.C.S.W.
Jean Craven, R.N.                     Denver General Hospital, Denver, CO
K. Harris, R.N.                       Stephen L. Dilts, M.D., Ph.D.
Alan D. Marinaccio, A.C.S.W.          Jonathan Ritvo, M.D.
Gretchen Mosman, R.N., M.S.N.         William Singletary, M.D.
Robert Oakan, Ph.D.
Joseph O'Geen, M.S.W.                 Diamond Head Mental Health Center,
Miriam Pomeroy, M.S.W.                  Honolulu, HI
The Chicago Institute for Psychoanalysis, Betsy Platt Weiner, M.D., M.P.H.
 Chicago, IL                          R. Jurgensen, M.D.
Joy Simon, M.A.
Max Forman, M.D.                      Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, NY
Roy R. Grinker, Jr., M.D.             Doris H. Milman, M.D.
Fred Robbins, M.D.                    Susanna Neumann, Ph.D.
Richard Tellingator, M.D.             Charles Toback, Ph.D.
Child Mental Health Center, Catholic  Eagleville Hospital, Eagleville, PA
 Charities, Chicago, IL               Bernard Sobel, D.O.
Theodore E. Te Pas, M.D.              George Layne, M.D.
                                      Laurence Miller, M.D.
Childrens Hospital, Ann Arbor, MI     Stephen Silverman, M.D.
Elva Poznanski, M.D.
Stephen C. Cooke, M.D.                The Edenwald Center, Pleasantville, NY
                                      Raoul P. Nadler, M.D.
Childrens Hospital, Washington, D.C.  Sol Nichtern, M.D.
Alan Apter, M.D.
Thomas Lustberg, M.D.                 Edgemont Hospital, Los Angeles, CA
Joseph Noshpitz, M.D.                 George J. Wayne, M.D.
Gary Spivak, M.D.                     James T. Ferguson, M.D.
Lynn Staton, M.D.                     Hannah Harris, M.D.


                                                  DSM-III Field Trials 475

Emory University Medical School, Atlanta, Theodore F. Mucha, M.D.
  GA                                  Paul G. Pentz, M.D.
Richard Ward, M.D.                    Myron M. Pisetsky, M.D.
Bill Martin, M.D.                     Gerald I. Rabinovitch, M.D.
Mridula Puri, M.D.                    Jack E. Rosenberg, M.D.
Patrick Ware, M.D.                    David A. Sperling, M.D.
                                      Peter M. Zeman, M.D.
Fairmount Farm Hospital, Philadelphia, PA
E. Lee Porter, M.D.                   J. Hillis Miller Health Center, Gainesville, FL
Beth B. Balaban, A.R.T.               Medhat Ashamalla, M.D.
                                      Donald Berghman, M.D.
Geisinger Medical Center, Danville, PA Roger Blashfield, Ph.D.
Hugo Kierszenbaum, M.D.               Kenneth Director, M.D.
Harry Little, M.D.                    Heather Hardcastle, M.D.
Stewart Thomson, M.D.                 Jon Hodgin, M.D.
                                      Elton Hurst, M.D.
                                      Mahmood Jahromi, M.D.
Gracie Square Hospital, New York, NY  John Kuldau, M.D.
Marvin H. Lipkowitz, M.D.             Aurora Lingao, M.D.
Charles Murkofsky, M.D.               Joe Llinas, M.D.
                                      Pushpa Mehrotra, M.D.
Hahnemann Medical School and Hospital, Robert Moradi, M.D.
  Philadelphia, PA                     Carlos Muniz, M.D.
Erwin R. Smarr, M.D.                   Jocelyne Rosenberg, M.D.
Keith Goffe, M.D.                     Don Schultz, M.D.
Donald Haupt, M.D.                    Viola Taboada, M.D.
Gary Kirshbaum, M.D.                  Alan Tesson, M.D.
Hollace Reed, R.N., M.S.N.
Bradley Sevin, M.D.                   Johnson County Mental Health Center,
Joshua Werblowsky, M.D.                 Mission, KS
                                       Burt Deming, Ph.D.
Hawthorn Center, Northville, MI        W. K. Rigby, Ph.D.
Harold L. Wright, M.D.
James Galligan, M.D.                   Kellogg Psychiatric Hospital, Corona, CA
                                       Theodore Lindauer, M.D.
Highland Hospital, Asheville, NC       Martin Greenberg, M.D.
Eric Peterson, M.D.                   Vicki Labrecque, Ph.D.
Jack W. Bonner, III, M.D.
George Doss, M.D.                      Kings County Hospital Center, Brooklyn, NY
Harold Gollberg, M.D.                  Nauttam Kothari, M.D.
Leo Potts, M.D.                        Vicki lanucelli, Ph.D.

Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada Kings-Tulare Community Mental Health
Klaus Minde, M.D.                       Center, Visalia, CA
                                       Luis H. Velosa, M.D.
Human Services Center, New Castle, PA  Cliff Anderson, Ph.D.
Betty Powell, M.D.                    Francie Becker, L.C.S.W.
                                       Rodolfo Borrego, L.C.S.W.
                                       Chuck Butler, M.S.W.
Humboldt County Community Mental Health Roger Engkjer, M.S.W.
  Services, Eureka, CA                 Chuck Floyd, M.S.W.
Wm. Patrick Murphy, M.D.               Hal Forman, Ph.D.
Richard B. Kramer, Ph.D.               Jim Gaede, L.C.S.W.
Richard L. Riley, M.D.                 Carol Goff, L.C.S.W.
                                       Ben Haws, Ph.D.
The Institute of Living, Hartford, CT  Ann Hubbard, M.S.W.
Paul A. Andrulonis, M.D.               Evan Maw, M.S.W.
Richard M. Bridburg, M.D.              Emanual Oliveria, L.C.S.W.
Jerome C. Evans, M.D.                  Hugo Padilla, M.S.W.
Ronald V. Hensley, M.D.                Lee Schroeder, L.C.S.W.
Howard G. Iger, M.D.                   Jean Smith, Ph.D.
Stephen O. Morris, M.D.                Walter Townsend, M.D.


476 Appendix F

La Frontera Center, Tucson, AZ         Medical College of Ohio at Toledo, Toledo,
Nelba Chavez, D.S.W.                    OH
Yolanda Sethe, A.C.S.W.                Joel P. Zrull, M.D.
Frank J. Tranchina, Ph.D.              Charles W. Davenport, M.D.
                                       Shirley M. Ferguson, M.D.
Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Marvin Gottlieb, M.D.
  Loma Linda, CA                       Barry Hensel, M.A.
Mrs. Julie Strother                    Mary Lenkay, M.D.
Ben Kovitz, M.D.                       Sharad Multani, M.D.
M. J. Nelson, M.D.                     Robert Walden, M.D.
Judith Perry, M.D.
                                       Medical College of Virginia, Richmond, VA
Long Island Jewish-Hillside Medical Center, Kenneth Solomon, M.D.
  Glen Oaks, NY                        Prakash G. Ettigi, M.D.
Charles J. Rabiner, M.D.               Lucy Jane King, M.D.
Mrs. Buddie Levkoff                    Robert J. Resnick, Ph.D.
Robert Marantz, M.D.                   Philip Schlobohm, M.D.
Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, The Menninger Foundation, Topeka, KS
  IL                                   R. O. Settle, M.D.
Hazel Mrazek, M.D.
Daniel Anzia, M.D.                     Miami Jewish Home and Hospital, Miami, FL
Kerwin Lebeis, M.D.                    Jack Skigen, M.D.
M. Victoria Paz, M.D.                  Andres Jiminez, M.D.
Domeena Renshaw, M.D.                  Eliot Stein, M.D.
Gregory Teas, M.D.
                                       Montgomery County Health Department,
Malcolm Bliss Mental Health Center, St. Silver Spring, MD
  Louis, MO                            Joseph Poirier, Ph.D.
Marijan Herjanic, M.D.                 Franklin Del Jones, M.D.
Bun Tee Co, Jr., M.D.                  Carolyn Ericson, A.C.S.W.
Bharat R.S. Nakra, M.D.
Earni S. Pal, M.D.                     Nassau Hospital, Mineola, NY
                                       Edward Sodaro, M.D.
Marriage Council of Philadelphia,
  Philadelphia, PA                     Nebraska Psychiatric Institute, Omaha, NE
Harold I. Lief, M.D.                   Sungdo Hong, M.D.
Ellen M. Berman, M.D.                  John Donaldson, M.D.
Mark H. Bernstein, M.D., Ph.D.         Musunuru Jagadees, M.D.
Beverlee Hurwitz Ciccone, M.Ed.
William W. Doyle, Jr., Ph.D.           New York City Employee Counseling Service,
George S. Feuer, M.S.W.                 New York, NY
Mary Ellen Florence, R.N., M.S.N.      Hana Rostain, M.D., M.P.H.
Roy G. Gravesen, M.D.                  Anna Zagoloff, M.D.
Sally S. Green, M.S.
Laurence M. Hof, M.Div.                New York Hospital Cornell Medical Center,
Sally Holtz, M.A.                       Westchester Division, White Plains, NY
William R. Miller, Ph.D.               Stefan Stein, M.D.
Robert Wieman, Ph.D.                   Richard Frances, M.D.
Ann Marie Williams, Ph.D.              Stephen Holzman, M.D.
Beverly J. Wyatt, M.Ed.
                                       New York State Psychiatric Institute, New
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN              York, NY
Toshihiko Maruta, M.D.                 Laurence Greenhill, M.D.
Robert Morse, M.D.                     Susan Braiman, M.S.W.
Gerald Peterson, M.D.                  Richard Brockman, M.D.
David Swanson, M.D.                    William Chambers, M.D.
                                       David Leibow, M.D.
McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA           Bobba Moody, M.S.W.
Thomas Bond, M.D.                      Leslie Powers, M.D.
Jonathan Kolb, M.D.                    Joachim Puig-Antich, M.D.
Joseph Lipinski, M.D.                  Norman Rosenthal, M.D.
Jacqueline Olds, M.D.                  Samuel G. Siris, M.D.
Harrison Pope, M.D.                   Gloria Stern, M.D.


                                                         DSM-III Field Trials 477

The Nicollet Clinic, Minneapolis, MN        Ravenswood Hospital, Chicago, IL
Steven L. Keller, M.D.                      Madeleine Gomez, M.D.
John H. Powers, Ph.D.                       Aaron Cooper, Ph.D.
                                             Ted Temkin, M.A.
North Central Arkansas Mental Health         Patti Hardy, M.A.
  Center, Batesville, AR                     Martha Lyons Cray, R.N.
Jess M. Young, Ph.D.                         Brian Zakem, M.A.
William A. Cochran, M.S.                     Charles Bosworth, M.A.
Robert L. Spray, Ph.D.                       Gemma Pieroni, A.C.S.W.
                                             Rose Stewart, B.A.
                                             Carroll Cradock, Ph.D.
North Charles Foundation, Somerville, MA     Laurieann Chutis, A.C.S.W.
Barbara Nicholson, M.S.W.                    Evanthea Spanos, M.A.
Gerard J. Donnellan, Ph.D.                   Janice Muhr, Ph.D.
                                             Roger Thomson, M.A.
Nueces County MH/MR Community Center,        Marlin Hoover, Ph.D.
  Corpus Christi, TX                         Mary Slatery, O.T.R., M.S.
Richard Campbell, Ph.D.
David Carpenter, M.A.                        Rockland County Community Mental Health
Terri Dismukes, M.S.W.                         Center, Pomona, NY
Christi Harris, M.A.                         Marjorie Smith, M.D.
Arthur Hodge, M.A.
Pam Hook, M.S.                               Rollman Psychiatric Institute, Cincinnati, OH
Joel Kutnick, M.D.                           Michael L. Mavroidis, M.D.
Valerie Langham, R.N., M.S.                  Shashi Bina, M.D.
Luis Salinas, M.S.W.                         Walter Cowan, M.D.
Luz Villarreal, M.A.
                                             Rush Presbyterian St. Luke's Hospital,
 Orchard Hills Psychiatric Center, Farmington  Chicago, IL
   Hills, MI                                 David Clark, M.A.
Kenneth E. Pitts, M.D.                       Robert W. Damptz, M.D.
Alexander H. Sackeyfio, M.D.                 Gracia Guise, M.S.
                                             Laura H. Watson, M.A.
 Payne Whitney Clinic, New York, NY
 Katherine Shear, M.D.                       St. Louis Comprehensive Drug Treatment
                                               Program, St. Louis, MO
Pennsylvania Hospital, Philadelphia, PA      Shankar N. Rao, M.D.
 A. James Morgan, M.D.                       K. W. Lee, M.D.
 Elena Blum, M.S.W.
 Phyllis Born, R.N., M.S.N.                  St. Louis Psychoanalytic Institute, St. Louis,
 Spencer Cherry, B.A.                          MO
 Cathleen McKaig, B.A.                       Robert W. Meyers, M.D.
 Michael Moore, B.A.                         Diane Kashuba, A.C.S.W.
 Alton Reynolds, M.Ed.                       Eugene E. Trunnell, M.D.
 Carlton Wells, A.A.S.
                                             St. Paul-Ramsey Hospital, St. Paul, MN
 Philadelphia Psychiatric Center, Philadelphia, Michael Koch, M.D.
   PA                                        Michael Garvey, M.D.
 Donald N. Haupt, M.D.                       Roger Johnson, M.D.
 Norman Shonfeld, M.D.                       Daniel Larson, M.D.
                                             Eugene Linker, Ph.D.
 Drug Dependence Treatment Unit, Philadel-   Mary Ann Wiggs, R.N.
   phia Veterans Hospital, Philadelphia, PA
 S. Okpaku, M.D., Ph.D.                      St. Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center of
                                               New York, New York, NY
                                             Ralph O'Connell, M.D.
 Pittsburgh Child Guidance Center,
                                             Jacob Aslanian, M.D.
   Pittsburgh, PA
                                             Robert Campion, M.D.
 Mina D. Kessler, M.D.
                                             John Casarino, M.D.
                                             Richard Malen, M.D.
 Prairie View M.H.C., Newton, KS             Barbara O'Brien, M.D.
 James K. O'Toole, M.D.                      Ian Shivack, M.D.


478 Appendix F

St. Vincents Hospital, Westchester Branch, State Correctional Institution, Pittsburgh, PA
  Harrison, NY                         Herbert E. Thomas, M.D.
Samuel J. Langer, M.D.
Bernard Cohen, M.D.                    State Hospital-South Idaho, Blackfoot, ID
                                       Carroll M. Elmore, M.D.
San Francisco Veterans Administration  S. Wayne Smith, M.D.
  Hospital, San Francisco, CA
Edward L. Merrin, M.D.                 Staten Island Children's Community Mental
J. F. Hiatt, M.D.                       Health Center, Staten Island, NY
                                       Nora Smith, M.D.
Seattle Veterans Administration Hospital, Teresita Bajas, M.D.
  Seattle, WA                          Maria Schneider, M.D.
Robert F. Barnes, M.D.                 Susanne Sternback, M.D.
Joseph Okimoto, M.D.
Richard Veith, M.D.                    Tennessee Neuropsychiatric Institute,
                                        Nashville, TN
The Sheppard and Enoch Pratt Hospital, James O. Brannen, M.D.
  Towson, MD                           Robert Jamieson, M.D.
Irvin Cohen, M.D.
Arthur Hildreth, M.D.                  Terry Children's Psychiatric Center, New
Marion Thomas, M.D.                     Castle, DE
Stephanie Yater, M.D.                  Anita L. Amurao, M.D.
                                       Joel B. Sands, M.D.
Sinai Hospital of Baltimore, Baltimore, MD
John Chapman Urbaitis, M.D.            Texas Research Institute of Mental Sciences,
Gary Klen, M.D.                         Houston, TX
Saul Lindenbaum, Ph.D.                 Mohsen Mirabi, M.D.
A. Douglas Logue, M.D.                 James Claghorn, M.D.
                                       Edwin Johnston, M.D.
Southeast Mental Health Center, San    William Valverde, M.D.
  Francisco, CA
Albert Glass, M.D.                     Tidewater Psychiatric Institute, Virginia
John Langdell, M.D.                     Beach, VA
                                       David C. Butler, Dir. of Administration
Southern California Permanente Medical Larry F. Constantino, R.R.A., R.N.
  Group, Los Angeles, CA               John H. Farr, M.D.
Hannah E. Harris, M.D.                 James F. Griswold, M.D.
Darlene Skorka, Ph.D.                  Beryl W. Langley, M.D.
                                       Murray C. Miller, M.D.
Southern Illinois University School of John A. Mirczak, M.D.
  Medicine, Springfield, IL            Peter O. Powell, Ph.D.
Alan L. Sterling, M.D.                 Leah Robinson, Ph.D.
                                       Irwin S. Sacks, Ph.D.
South Oaks Hospital, Amityville, NY    Julian W. Selig, Jr., M.D.
Pasquale A. Carone, M.D.
Tadao Ogura, M.D.                      Timberlawn Psychiatric Hospital, Dallas, TX
Sivachandra Vallury, M.D.              James K. Peden, M.D.
                                       Doyle Carson, M.D.
                                       Byron Howard, M.D.
Spokane Community Mental Health Center, John G. Looney, M.D.
  Spokane, WA
James W. Larson, M.D.                  Toledo Mental Health Center, Toledo, OH
Roger Harman, Ph.D.                    William J. Lenz, M.D.
Paul Quinnett, Ph.D.                   Shirley Ferguson, M.D.
Douglas Roszell, M.D.                 Wakil Khan, M.D.
Judy Rousso, M.D.                     Wilfried Kokott, M.D.
John Turner, Ph.D.                    Ernst Raab, M.D.
                                      Thomas C. Small, M.D.
The Stamford Hospital, Stamford, CT
Leonard Gold, M.D.                    Tuckahoe Mental Health Clinic, Tuckahoe,
James Beaudoin, M.D.                    NY
Harry Orr, M.D.                       Max Spital, M.D.
William Thompson, M.D.                Cathy Hertzel, M.S.W.


                                                        DSM-III Field Trials 479

Tulsa Psychiatric Center, Tulsa, OK         Jing Hsu, M.D.
James Allen, M.D.                           Alvin Murphy, M.D.
Claudine Arthrell, M.S.W.                   Gordon Trockman, M.D.
Fran Berman, Ph.D.                          Jane Waldron, M.S.W.
Arcille Brown M.S.W.
Beverly Duffield, M.S.W.                    The University of Iowa College of Medicine
Merrily Hamilton, M.S.W.                      and Univ. General Hospital, Iowa City, IA
George Parkhurst, M.D.                      Ming Tsuang, M.D., Ph.D.
Pia Petculescu, M.D.                        Nancy Andreasen, M.D., Ph.D.
Lucy Saeger, M.S.W.                         Joseph Barkmeier, M.D.
                                            Mark Chalem, M.D.
University of Alberta Hospital, Edmonton,   John Clancy, M.D.
  Alberta                                   Wayne Christenson, M.D.
H. F. A. Azim, M.D.                         William Coryell, M.D.
P. Copus, M.D.                              Shirley Dolezal, M.D.
Mark Prazoff, M.Sc.                         Richard Finn, M.D.
                                            Jerry Lewis, M.D.
University of Arkansas School for Medical   Doyne Loyd, M.D.
  Sciences, Little Rock, AR                 John Lyskowski, M.D.
Fred O. Henker, M.D.                        James McDaniel, M.D.
Keong Chye Cheah, M.D.                      Russell Noyes, M.D.

University of California—Irvine, Department Department of Psychology, University of
  of Psychiatry, Orange, CA                   Miami, Coral Gables, FL
Jon F. Heiser, M.D.                         Theodore Millon, Ph.D.
Roderick Ponath, M.D.
Donald Wilbert, M.D.                        University of Missouri-Columbia Children
                                              and Youth Center, Columbia, MO
U.C.L.A. Neuropsychiatric Institute, Los    Javad Kashani, M.D.
  Angeles, CA                               Daniel Anasseril, M.D.
Dennis P. Cantwell, M.D.
Patrick Bezdek, M.D.                        University of Pittsburgh Medical School,
Jodi Brkich, M.D.                             Pittsburgh, PA
Helene Buerger, M.D.                        John Neil, M.D.
Howard Click, M.D.                          Thomas Horn, M.D.
Charles Hollingsworth, M.D.                 Duane G. Lyske, M.D.
Robert Hunt, M.D.
Ashad Hussain, M.D.                         University of Rochester Medical Center,
Tony King, M.D.                               Rochester, NY
Cathie-Ann Lippman, M.D.                    Lyman Wynne, M.D., Ph.D.
Richard Mattison, M.D.                      Thomas Gift, M.D.
Tom Nakata, M.D.                            David Harder, Ph.D.
Sandy Perlo, M.D.
Nicholas Putnam, M.D.                       University of South Florida College of
Drew Russell, M.D.                            Medicine, Tampa, FL
Thomas Vaughn, M.D.                         Pauline S. Powers, M.D.
Human Sexuality Program, U.C. San           Department of Psychiatry, University of
  Francisco Medical School, San Francisco,    Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
  CA                                        Robert E. Allen, M.D.
Harvey Caplan, M.D.                         William Crary, Ph.D.
                                            Elaine Eaton, Ph.D.
University of Connecticut Health Center,    Thomas Krulisky, M.D.
  Farmington, CT                            Katherine Whipple, M.A.
Allan Tasman, M.D.                          Kerrin White, M.D.
Mahlon Hale, M.D.
Peter Mirkin, M.D.                          University of Texas Health Science Center,
                                              San Antonio, TX
Department of Psychiatry, University of     Mary Ann Weir, M.D., Ph.D.
  Hawaii, Honolulu, HI                      Martin B. Giffen, M.D.
Richard Markoff, M.D.                       Laurent S. Lehmann, M.D.
Bernice Coleman, M.D.                       James F. Maddux, M.D.
Joseph Giannasio, M.D.                      Kenneth L. Matthews, M.D.


480 Appendix F

University of Texas Student Health Center, West Virginia University Medical Center,
 Austin, TX                             Morgantown, WV
James M. Shultz, M.D.                 David F. Colvin, M.D.
Ed Gray, M.D.                         John Kelley, M.D.
Glenn E. Roark, M.D.                  Patricia Williams, M.D.

University of Washington, Hall Health Yale University School of Medicine, New
  Center, Seattle, WA                   Haven, CT
Ronnie Sue Stangler, M.D.             Hoyle Leigh, M.D.
Deborah Anapol, B.A.
W.G. Bentz, M.S.W.                    Yale University Health Services, Division
Barbara Courtney, M.S.W.                Mental Hygiene, New Haven, CT
Harriet DeMaris, M.D.                  Robert L. Arnstein, M.D.
Robert Frank, B.A.                    Stephen Atkins, M.D.
Robert Hodes, B.A.                    Andrew Baiter, M.D.
Helen Kipple, M.D.                    Jill Blum
Peter Maxim, M.D.                     Jeffrey Brown, M.D.
Dolph Printz, Ph.D.                   Janice Brunig
Roger Rose, M.D.                      Hazel Dembo, M.S.W.
Ruth Wheeler, M.S.W.                  George Drinka, M.D.
Cheryl Thompson, B.A.                  John Edwards, M.D.
Providence V.A. Hospital, Providence, RI William A. Ellis, M.D.
Robert Johnston, B.M., B.Ch.           Iza Erlich, M.S.W.
Maxim Daamen, M.D.                    Donald Fineberg, M.D.
Thomas Laughren, M.D.                  Robert Florin, M.D.
                                       William Glazer, M.D.
V.A. Medical Center, Tuscaloosa, AL    Myrtha Gruber, M.D.
Ivan Elder, Ph.D.                      Cecilia Jones
Faye Boone, R.N., M.A.                 Cheryl Kurash
Charlotte Hamner, M.S.W.               David McMahon, M.D.
Penny Hust, R.N., M.S.N.               Eric Millman, M.D.
Sharon Skelton, Ph.D.                  Sara Morey, M.S.W.
John E. Werner, D.O.                   Gwen Morgan
                                       Lynn Morrow, M.D.
V.A. Outpatient Clinic, Boston, MA     Edward Mueller, M.D.
Winthrop A. Burr, M.D.                 Jerome Myer, M.D.
Martin Merowitz, M.D.                  Arthur Nielsen M.D.
Edward Morrier, A.C.S.W.
Margaret R. Nichols, A.C.S.W.          Mahmoud Okasha, M.D.
                                       William C. Phillips M.S.W.
The Waltham Hospital, Waltham, MA      Patricia Plouffe
Stuart Flerlage, MD.                   Ernst Prelinger, Ph.D.
Martin Jacobs, Ph. D.                  John Purtzer, D.O.
                                       Laura Reiter
Western Missouri Mental Health Center, Lorraine D. Siggins, M.D.
  Kansas City, MO
James R. Carter, M.D.                 Jonathan Swift, M.S.W.
Rizk Hemaya, M.D.                     Patricia Wesley, M.D.
Huseni Poonawala, M.D.                Joan Wexler, M.S.W.
Max Teng, M.D.                        Erik Zimmerman, M.D.

PARTICIPANTS IN PRIVATE PRACTICE

Elizabeth Adams, M.D., Honolulu, HI    Earle O. Brown, Jr., M.D., North Adams, MA
Sidney I. Altman, M.D., Elkins Park, PA James Bullard, M.D., Washington, DC
Robert James Baker, M.D., Pittsburgh, PA Henry L. Burks, M.D., Modesto, CA
H.L. Baiters, Ph.D., Lincoln, NE      Dugald D. Chisholm, M.D. Atascadero, CA
Frances Barnes, M.D., Washington, DC  Ronald Costell, M.D. Washington, DC
Richard P. Barthel, M.D., Milwaukee, WI Frank E. Crumley, M.D., Dallas, TX
Sanford Billet, M.D., Washington, DC  Nancy A. Durant, M.D., Plainfield, NJ
Edgar Brichta, M.D., Minot, ND        Jack Durell, M.D., Washington, DC


                                                           DSM-III Field Trials 481

Martha Ehbrecht, M.D., Cherokee, IA          Ahmed Nafees, M.D., M.P.H., San Diego, CA
Joel Finkelstein, M.D., Minneapolis, MN      Robert Neu, M.D., Washington, DC
Leslie Mitchell Forman, M.D., Blauvelt, NY   A. Johan Noordsij, M.D., Chatham, NJ
Eugene Frank, M.D., Washington, DC           James K. OToole, M.D., Newton, KS
Edward Futterman, M.D., New Haven CT         Domingo Pagan, M.D., Ottawa, Ontario,
Marc E. Garfinkel, M.D., Pittsburgh, PA        Canada
 Irvin D. Godofsky, M.D., Marina Del Ray,    Roger Peele, M.D., Washington, DC
  CA                                         Robert W. Pollack, M.D., Winter Park, FL
 Yonkel Goldstein, Ph.D., Fayetteville, NC   Sanford Pomerantz, M.D., Topeka, KS
Jean Goodwin, M.D., Albuquerque, NM          Lloyd Price, M.D., Belmont, MA
Edmond Goold, M.D., Columbus, OH             Harvey Rice, M.D., Washington, DC
Sheila Hafter Gray, M.D., Washington, DC     James S. Robbins, M.D., Beverly Hills, CA
Maurice Green, M.D., New York, NY            Richard John Robins, M.D., Westport, CT
C. Thomas Gualtieri, M.D., Chapel Hill, NC   Manuel Roman, M.D., Washington, DC
Werner Halpern, M.D., Rochester, NY          Israel H. Rosenberg, Ph.D., New York, NY
John David Hamilton, M.D., Ipswich, MA       Harvey A. Rosenstock, M.D., Houston, TX
 Alexandra Harrison, M.D., Cambridge, MA     Harvey Ruben, M.D., New Haven, CT
Nancy Haslett, M.D., New Orleans, LA         Philip Santora, M.D., Washington, DC
 Charles E. Hauser, M.D., Colorado Springs,  Aaron Satloff, M.D., Pittsford, NY
   CO                                        Burton Schonfeld, M.D., Washington, DC
Robert G. Hillman, M.D., Santa Fe, NM        C.E. Schorer, M.D., Detroit, MI
Julius Hoffman, M.D., Washington, DC         Gary Singleton, M.D., Washington, DC
H.S. Hudson, M.D., Albuquerque, NM           Thoburn R. Snyder, M.D., Philadelphia, PA
 Roy Jenkins, A.C.S.W., San Diego, CA        Myron Stein, M.D., Amherst, MA
Avraam Kazan, M.D., Sarasota, FL             John R. Stephens, M.D., Palo Alto, CA
 Priscilla A. Keeler, M.D., Wilmington, DE   Kosta Stojanovich, M.D., Honolulu, HI
 George Kowallis, M.D., New York, NY         Thomas Sullivan, M.D., Detroit, MI
 Murray Krelstein, M.D., Yuba City, CA       Sylvia A. Thorpe, Ph.D., Seattle, WA
Martin Lazoritz, M.D., Winter Park, FL       Donn Tippett, M.D., Washington, DC
 William Legat, M.D., Washington, DC
 William R. LeVine, M.D., Wichita, KS        Anthony Traweek, Ph.D., Luke AFB, AZ
 James V. Magnuson, M.D., Dixon, IL          Walter H. Troffkin, M.D., Elkins Park, PA
 Bernard Malloy, M.D., Washington, DC        Fiameta Vargas, M.D., Baltimore, MD
 George J. McAfee, M.D., Indianapolis, IN    Ken R. Vincent, Ed.D., Houston, TX
Alexander Milne, M.D., Belmont, CA           Paul Wilson, M.D., Washington, DC


This page intentionally left blank 


                                           IL^rk«/l,¥ JL JLAJL JLJL l%*.tv%.
                               \JJL JL^JLCl,|^JLliLfCJlLJl,%, J. Ite'JLJLJLI.CI


This index includes names of diagnostic categories in DSM-III as well as other
widely used diagnostic terms. Descriptive terms included in Appendix B: Glossary of
Technical Terms, as well as in Appendix A: Decision Trees for Differential Diagnosis
are not included.
Page numbers for diagnostic criteria are in parentheses.

Abuse, Substance 164. See Substance     Adolescent antisocial behavior, Child-
    use disorders 163-179                   hood or 332
Academic or work inhibition, Adjust-    Adolescents, Diagnosis of personality
    ment disorder with 301                  disorders in children and 305-306
  Problem 332                           Adult antisocial behavior 332
Acute, Alcohol intoxication. See Alcohol Affective disorders 205-224
    intoxication 129(131)                 Atypical bipolar disorder 223
  Confusional state. See Delirium 104     Atypical depression 223
    (107)                                 Bipolar disorder, depressed/manic/
  Paranoid reaction. See Acute paranoid     mixed 217
    disorder 197 (197)                    Cyclothymic disorder 218(219)
  Reactions to stress. See Post-traumatic Dysthymic disorder 220(222)
    stress disorder 236(238), Adjust-     Hallucinogen 156(156)
    ment disorder 299(300)                Major depression, single episode/re-
  Schizophrenic episode. See Schizo-        current 34, 218
    phreniform disorder 199(200), Brief   Major depressive episode 210(213)
    reactive psychosis 200(201), A-       Manic episode 206(208)
    typical psychosis 202               Affective syndrome, Organic 117(118)
Additional codes 335                      Other or unspecified substance-in-
  Diagnosis deferred on Axis II/Diag-       duced 161-162
    nosis or condition deferred on Axis Agoraphobia:
    I/No diagnosis on Axis II/No diag-    With/without panic attacks 226(227)
    nosis or condition on Axis I/ Un-   Alcohol abuse/dependence 169(169)
    specified mental disorder (nonpsy-
    chotic) 335                         Alcohol, organic mental disorders 129-
                                            139
Adjustment disorder 299(300)              Amnestic disorder 136(137)
  Subtypes: With anxious mood/atypi-      Dementia associated with alcoholism
    cal features/depressed mood/dis-        137(138)
    turbance of conduct/mixed distur-     Hallucinosis 135(136)
    bance of emotions and conduct/        Idiosyncratic intoxication 132(132)
    mixed emotional features/physical     Intoxication 129(131)
    symptoms/withdrawal/work (or ac-      Paranoid state. See Paranoid disorder
    ademic) inhibition 299-302              195 (196)
Adjustment reaction. See Adjustment       Withdrawal 133(133)
    disorder 299(300)                     Withdrawal delirium 134(135)
Adolescence, Disorders usually first evi- Alcoholic, deterioration. See Dementia
    dent in infancy, childhood, or 35-      associated with alcoholism 137
    99                                      (138)

                                    483


 484 Index

  Hallucinosis. See Alcohol hallucinosis  Panic disorder 230(231)
     135 (136)                            Phobic disorders 225-230
  Jealousy. See Paranoid disorder 195     Post-traumatic stress disorder, Acute/
     (196)                                  Chronic or delayed 236(238)
  Paranoia. See Paranoid disorder 195     Simple phobia 228(229)
     (196)                                Social phobia 227(228)
   Psychosis. See Alcohol amnestic dis- Anxiety disorders of childhood or ado-
     order 136(137), Dementia asso-         lescence 50-57
     ciated with alcoholism 137(138),     Avoidant disorder 53(55)
    Alcohol hallucinosis 135(136), Al-    Overanxious disorder 55(56)
     cohol idiosyncratic intoxication     Separation anxiety disorder 50(53)
     132(132), Alcohol intoxication 129 Anxiety neuroses. See Panic disorder
     (131), Alcohol withdrawal delirium      230(231), Generalized anxiety dis-
     134(135)                                order 232(233)
 Alcoholism, Dementia associated with.   Anxiety states 230-238
    See Alcohol dependence 169-170
                                        Anxious mood, Adjustment disorder with
Alzheimer's disease. See Dementias aris-     301
    ing in the senium and presenium
    124-128                              Arithmetic disorder, Developmental 94
                                             (95)
Amnesia, Anterograde/retrograde. See
     Amnestic syndrome 112(113),         Arteriosclerotic dementia. See Multi-
     Psychogenic amnesia 253(255)            infarct dementia 127(128)
Amnestic disorder, Alcohol 136(137)      Articulation disorder, Developmental
  Barbiturate 141(142)                       98(98)
   Other or unspecified substance 161-  Arylcyclohexylamine. See Phencyclidine
    162                                  Asthenic personality disorder. See De-
Amnestic syndrome 112(113)                   pendent personality disorder 324
 Amphetamine or similarly acting sym-        (325)
    pathomimetic abuse/dependence        Attention deficit disorder 41-45
     173-174                               Residual type 44(44)
                                           with hyperactivity 41(43)
 Amphetamine or similarly acting sym-
                                           without hyperactivity 44(44)
    pathomimetic, organic mental dis-
     orders 147-150                      Atypical children. See Pervasive develop-
  Delirium 148(149)                          mental disorders 86-92
   Delusional disorder 149(149)          Atypical, affective disorder 223
  Intoxication 147(148)                   Anxiety disorder 239
  Withdrawal 150(150)                     Bipolar disorder 223
 Anankastic personality disorder. See      Conduct disorder 50
     Compulsive personality disorder      Depression 223
     326(327)                              Dissociative disorder 260
                                           Eating disorder 73
Anorexia nervosa 67(69)                    Factitious disorder with physical
 Anterograde amnesia. See Amnestic syn-      symptoms 290
     drome 112(113)                       Features, Adjustment disorder with
Antisocial behavior, Adult 332               302
  Childhood or adolescent 332             Gender identity disorder 266
                                           Impulse control disorder 298
Antisocial personality disorder 317       Mixed or other personality disorder
     (320)                                   329-330
Anxiety disorders 225-239                 Or mixed organic brain syndrome
   Agoraphobia 226(227)                     123(123)
  Atypical 239                            Paranoid disorder 198
  Generalized 232(233)                    Paraphilia 275


                                                                Index 485

  Pervasive developmental disorder 92   Catatonic type, Schizophrenic disorder
  Psychosexual dysfunction 281              190(191)
  Psychosis 202                         Cephalalgia. See Psychogenic pain dis-
  Somatoform disorder 251-252               order 247(249), Psychological fac-
  Specific developmental disorder (Axis     tors affecting physical condition
    II) 99                                  303(303)
  Stereotyped movement disorder 77      Cerebral dysfunction. See Attention
  Tic disorder 77                           deficit disorder 41-45
Autism, Infantile 87(89)                Child abuse 36. See Parent-Child
Avoidant, disorder of childhood or ado-     Problem 333
    lescence 53(55)                     Childhood, Gender identity disorder of
  Personality disorder 323(324)             264(265)
                                        Childhood or adolescence, Anxiety dis-
Barbiturate or similarly acting sedative    orders of 50-57
    or hypnotic abuse/dependence 170      Disorders usually first evident in in-
    (171)                                   fancy, 35-99
Barbiturate or similarly acting sedative Childhood or adolescent antisocial be-
    or hypnotic, organic mental dis-        havior 332
    orders 139-142                      Children and adolescents, Diagnosis of
  Amnestic disorder 141(142)                personality disorder? in 305
  Intoxication 139(140)
  Withdrawal 140(141)                   Chronic, affective disorders, Cyclo-
  Withdrawal delirium 141(141)              thymic 218(219)
                                          Dysthymic 220(222)
Bereavement, Uncomplicated 333
                                        Chronic factitious disorder with physical
Bestiality. See Zoophilia 270(270)          symptoms 288(290)
Bipolar disorder, Atypical 223          Chronic motor tic disorder 75(75)
  Depressed/manic/mixed 217
                                        Cocaine abuse 173(173)
Blackouts 130                           Cocaine, organic mental disorder 145-
Borderline, child. See Schizotypal person-  147
    ality disorder 309, 312(312)          Intoxication 145(146)
  Intellectual functioning 332          Combination of substances excluding
  Mental retardation. See Borderline in-    opioids and alcohol, Dependence on
    tellectual functioning 332              179
  Personality disorder 321(322)
                                        Compensation neurosis. See Psychologi-
  Schizophrenia. See Schizotypal per-
    sonality disorder 309, 312(312)         cal factors affecting physical con-
                                            dition 303(303)
Brain dysfunction. See Attention Defi-    Psychogenic pain disorder 247(249)
    cit disorder 41-45                    Malingering 331-332
Brief reactive psychosis 200(201)       Compulsive, Conduct disorder. See Dis-
Briquet's syndrome. See Somatization        orders of impulse control not else-
    disorder 241(243)                       where classified 291-298
Bulimia 69(70)                            Gambling. See Pathological Gambling
                                            291(292)
Caffeine, organic mental disorder 160-    Personality disorder 326(327)
    161                                   See also Obsessive compulsive dis-
  Intoxication 160(161)                     order 234(235)
Caffeinism. See Caffeine intoxication   Concentration camp syndrome. See Post-
    160(161)                                traumatic stress disorder 236(238)
Cannabis, abuse/dependence 175(176)     Conditions not attributable to a mental
Cannabis, organic mental disorders          disorder 6,331-334
    156-159                             Conduct disorder (childhood or adoles-
  Delusional disorder 158(158)              cence) 45-50
  Intoxication 157(158)                   Atypical 50


486 Index

  Socialized, aggressive 45(49)         Depersonalization neurosis. See Deper-
    nonaggressive 45(49)                    sonalization disorder 259(260)
  Undersocialized, aggressive 45(47)    Depressed mood, Adjustment disorder
    nonaggressive 46(47)                    with 301
Conjugal paranoia. See Paranoid dis-    Depression, Atypical 223
    orders 195-198                        Major, single episode/recurrent 218
Conversion disorder 244(247)            Depressive, Character. See Dysthymic
Cyclothymia disorder 218(219)               disorder 220(222)
  Personality. See Cyclothymic disorder   Episode, Major 210(213)
    218(219)                              Neurosis. See Dysthymic disorder
                                            220(222). See also Major Depression
Delirium 104(107)                           218, Adjustment disorder with de-
  Alcohol withdrawal 134(135)               pressed mood 301
  Amphetamine 150(150)                    Personality. See Dysthymic disorder
  Barbiturate 140(141)                      220(222)
  Phencyclidine (PCP) or similarly
    acting arylcyclohexylamine 152      Developmental disorders, Pervasive 86-
                                            92
    (153)
                                          Atypical 92
  Other or unspecified substance-in-
    duced 161                             Childhood onset 90(91)
                                            Full syndrome present/residual state
Delirium tremens. See Alcohol with-           92
    drawal delirium 134(135)
                                          Infantile autism 87(89)
Delusional disorder, Amphetamine-in-        Full syndrome present/residual state
    duced 149                                 90
  Cannabis-induced 158(158)
  Hallucinogen-induced 155(155)         Developmental disorders, Specific (Axis
  Organic 114(115), 161                     II) 92-99
  Other or unspecified substance-in-      Arithmetic 94(95)
    duced 161                             Articulation 98(98)
                                          Atypical 99
Dementia 107(111)
                                          Language, expressive type 95(96)
  Associated with alcoholism 137(138)
                                            receptive type 96(97)
  Multi-infarct 127(128)
                                          Mixed specific 98
  Other or unspecified substance-in-
                                          Reading 93(94)
    duced 161
                                        Diagnosis, deferred on Axis I 335
Dementia, senile onset, Primary degen-
    erative, with delirium/with delu-     Deferred on Axis II 335
    sions / with depression / uncompli- Disorders of impulse control not else-
    cated 126                               where classified 291-298
  Presenile onset, Primary degenerative,  Atypical 298
    with delirium/with delusions/with     Intermittent explosive 295(297)
    depression/uncomplicated 126          Isolated explosive 297(298)
Dementias arising in the senium and       Kleptomania 293(294)
    presenium 124-128                     Pathological gambling 291(292)
  Multi-infarct dementia 127(128)         Pyromania 294(295)
  Primary degenerative dementia 124     Disorders usually first evident in infancy,
    (126)                                   childhood, or adolescence 35-99
Dependence, on a commonly abused sub-     Anxiety disorders 50-57
    stance. See Substance use disorders   Attention deficit disorder 43-45
    163-179                               Conduct disorders 45-50
  On a combination of substances 179      Eating disorders 67-72
                                          Other disorders with physical mani-
Dependent personality disorder 324          festations 78-86
    (325)                                 Pervasive developmental disorders
Depersonalization disorder 259(260)         86-92


                                                                 Index 487

  Specific developmental disorders 92-    With psychological symptoms 286
    99                                       (287)
  Stereotyped movement disorders 73-    Failure to thrive. See Reactive attach-
     77                                     ment disorder of infancy 57(59)
Disorganized type, Schizophrenic dis-
                                        Feeding disturbance. See Eating disorders
    order 190(190)                          67-73
Dissociative disorders 253-260
                                        Fetal alcohol syndrome, Mental retarda-
  Atypical 260
   Depersonalization disorder 259(260)      tion in 38
   Multiple personality 257(259)        Fetishism 268(269)
  Psychogenic amnesia 253(255)          Folie a deux. See Shared paranoid dis-
   Psychogenic fugue 255(257)               order 197(197)
 Disturbance of conduct, Adjustment dis- Frigidity. See Inhibited sexual excite-
    order with 301                          ment 279
 Don Juanism. See Psychosexual disorder Frontal lobe syndrome. See Organic
    not elsewhere classified 282-283        personality syndrome 118(119)
Down's syndrome, Mental retardation in  Fugue, Psychogenic 255(257)
    38
                                        Functional, dyspareunia/vaginismus 280
Dysfunctions, Psychosexual 275-281        Enuresis 79(80)
 Dyspareunia, Functional 280              Encopresis 81(82)
 Dysthymic disorder 220(222)
                                        Gambling, Pathological 291(292)
 Eating disorders 67-73                 Ganser syndrome. See Factitious disorder
  Anorexia nervosa 67(69)                   with psychological symptoms 286
   Atypical 73                               (287)
   Bulimia 69(70)
   Pica 71(72)                          Gender identity disorders 261-266
  Rumination disorder of infancy 72       Atypical 266
     (73)                                 of Childhood 264(265)
                                          Transsexualism 261(263)
 Ego-dystonic homosexuality 281(282)
Ejaculation, Premature 280              Generalized anxiety disorder 232(233)
 Elective mutism 62(63)                 Gilles de la Tourette's Syndrome. See
                                            Tourette's disorder 76(77)
 Encopresis, Functional 81(82)
 Enuresis, Functional 79(80)
 Episodic, affective disorders          Hallucinogen abuse 175(175)
   Bipolar 217(218)                     Hallucinogen, organic mental disorders
   Major depressive 210(213)                153(156)
   Manic 206(208)                         Affective disorder 156(156)
Exhibitionism 272(272)                    Delusional disorder 155(155)
                                          Hallucinosis 153(154)
Explosive disorder, Intermittent 295
     (297)                              Hallucinosis, Alcohol 135(136)
   Isolated 297(298)                       Hallucinogen-induced 153(154)
   Personality. See Intermittent explosive Organic 115(116)
     disorder 295(297)                     Other or unspecified substance-in-
 Expressive, Dysphasia. See Development-     duced 161-162
     al language disorder, expressive   Hebephrenic schizophrenia. See Schizo-
     type 95(96)                            phrenic disorder, Disorganized type
                                             190
 Factitious disorders 285-290           Histrionic personality disorder 313(315)
   Atypical, with physical symptoms
     290                                Homosexuality, Ego-dystonic 281(282)
   Chronic, with physical symptoms      Hospitalism. See Reactive attachment
     288(290)                                disorder of infancy 57(59)


488 Index

Hyperactive child syndrome. See At-     Infantile autism 87(89)
    tention deficit disorder with hyper-  Full syndrome present/Residual state
    activity 41(43)                         90
Hyperkinesis with developmental delay.  Inhibited, male/female orgasm 279-280
    See Attention deficit disorder with   sexual desire/excitement 278-279
    hyperactivity 41(43), Specific de-
    velopmental disorders 92-99         Intermittent explosive disorder 295
                                            (297)
Hyperkinetic reaction of childhood,
    Hyperkinetic syndrome. See Atten-   Interpersonal problems. See Conditions
    tion deficit disorder with hyperac-     not attributable to a mental dis-
    tivity 41(43)                           order, V Codes for 331-334
Hypnotic. See Barbiturate               Intoxication 120-122
Hypochondriacal neurosis. See Hypo-       Alcohol 129(131)
    chondriasis 249(251)                  Amphetamine 147(148)
                                          Barbiturate 139(140)
Hypochondriasis 249(251)                  Caffeine 160(161)
Hypomanic disorder. See Atypical bi-      Cannabis 157(158)
    polar disorder 223                    Cocaine 145(146)
                                          Idiosyncratic (alcohol) 132(132)
Hysteria. See Conversion disorder 244     Opioid 142(143)
    (247), Dissociative disorders 253-    Organic brain syndrome 120(122)
    260, Factitious disorders 285-290     Pathological (alcohol idiosyncratic)
Hysterical, neurosis, Conversion type.      132(132)
    See Conversion disorder 244(247)      Phencyclidine (PCP) or similarly act-
  Neurosis, dissociative type. See Dis-     ing arylcyclohexylamine 151(151)
    sociative disorders 253-260, Sleep-   Other 161-162
    walking disorder 82(84)
                                        Involutional, melancholia. See Major de-
  Personality. See Histrionic personality
    disorder 313(315)                       pression 218
  Psychosis. See Brief reactive psychosis Paranoid state. See Paranoid disorders
    200(201), Factitious disorder with      195-198
    psychological symptoms 286(287)
                                        Isolated explosive disorder 297(298)
Identity disorder (of adolescence) 65-
    67                                  Jealousy, Alcoholic. See Alcohol organic
                                            mental disorders 129-139
Identity disorder, Gender 261-266
  Atypical 266
   Of childhood 264-266                 Kleptomania 293(294)
  Transsexualism 261(263)                Korsakoff's disease. See Alcohol amnes-
Impotence. See Inhibited sexual excite-      tic disorder 136(137)
     ment 279
Impulse control not elsewhere classified, Labile personality disorder. See Cyclo-
    Disorders of 291-298                     thymic disorder 218(219)
  Intermittent explosive 295(297)        Language disorder, Developmental 95-
  Isolated explosive 297(298)                98
   Kleptomania 293(294)                    Articulation disorder 98(98)
  Pathological gambling 291(292)           Expressive type 95(96)
  Pyromania 294(295)                       Mixed specific 98
 Inadequate personality disorder. See      Receptive type 96(97)
     Atypical, mixed, or other personality Latent schizophrenia. See Schizotypal
     disorder 329-330                        personality disorder 310
 Infancy, childhood, or adolescence, Dis-
   orders usually first evident in 35-99 Major affective disorders 206(217)


                                                                Index 489

Major depression, single episode/recur- Neurasthenia. See Dysthymic disorder
    rent 218                                220(222)
Major depressive episode 210(213)       Neurasthenic neurosis. See Dysthymic
Malingering 331-332                         disorder 220(222)
Manic-depressive illness. See Bipolar dis- Neurosis 9
    order 217                             Anxiety. See Panic disorder 230(231),
Manic episode 206(208)                      Generalized anxiety disorder 232
Marital problem 333                         (233)
Masochism, Sexual 273(274)                Depersonalization. See Depersonal-
Melancholia 215                             ization disorder 259(260)
Mental disorder (DSM-III) 5-6             Depressive. See Dysthymic disorder
  Conditions not attributable to a 6        220(222). See also Major depres-
Mental retardation 36(40)                   sion 218, Adjustment disorder
  Subtypes: Mild/moderate/severe/pro-       with depressed mood 301
    found/unspecified 39-40               Hypochondriacal. See Hypochondriasis
Metabolic encephalopathy. See Delir-        249(251)
    ium 104                               Hysterical, conversion type. See Con-
Mild mental retardation 39                  version disorder 244(247), Psycho-
Minimal brain damage. See Attention         genie pain disorder 247(249)
    deficit disorder 41-45                Hysterical, dissociative type. See Dis-
Minor cerebral dysfunction. See Atten-      sociative disorders 253-260, Sleep-
    tion deficit disorder 41-45, Specific   walking disorder 82(84)
    developmental disorders 92-99         Neurasthenic. See Dysthymic disorder
                                            220(222)
Mixed, disturbance of emotions and con-
                                          Obsessive compulsive. See Obsessive
    duct, Adjustment disorder with
                                            compulsive disorder 234(235)
    301
  Emotional features, Adjustment dis-     Phobic. See Phobic disorders 225-
    order with 301                          230, Separation anxiety disorder
  Or other personality disorders 329-       50(53)
    330                                 Neurotic disorders 9-10
  Or unspecified substance abuse, Other, No diagnosis on Axis II/No diagnosis
    179                                     or condition on Axis I 335
  Or unspecified substance-induced men- No mental disorder. See No diagnosis or
    tal disorder 171                        condition on Axis I 335, No diag-
Mixed organic, brain syndrome, Atypical     nosis on Axis II 335
    or 123(123)                         Nonalcoholic Korsakoff s psychosis. See
  Mental disorder, PCP-induced 153          Amnestic syndrome 112(113)
Mixed specific developmental disorder   Noncompliance with medical treatment
    98                                      333
Moderate mental retardation 39          Nonpsychotic mental disorder, Unspeci-
Movement disorders, Stereotyped 73-         fied 335
    77                                  Nymphomania. See Psychosexual dis-
Multi-infarct dementia 127(128)             order not elsewhere classified 282-
Multiple personality 257(259)               283
Multiple substance abuse/dependence
    166                                 Obsessive-compulsive disorder 234
Munchausen syndrome. See Chronic            (235). See also Compulsive Person-
    factitious disorder with physical       ality Disorder 326(327)
    symptoms 288(290)                   Obsessive compulsive neurosis. See Ob-
                                            sessive compulsive disorder 234
Mutism, Elective 62(63)
                                            (235)
Narcissistic personality disorder 315   Occupational problem 332
    (317)                               Opioid abuse/dependence 171(172)


490 Index

Opioid and other nonalcoholic sub-      Other disorders of infancy, childhood, or
    stances, Dependence on combination      adolescence 57-67
    of 179                                Elective mutism 62(63)
Opioid-induced organic mental dis-        Identity disorder 65(67)
    orders 142-145                        Oppositional disorder 63(64)
  Intoxication 142(143)                   Reactive attachment disorder of in-
  Withdrawal 144(145)                       fancy 57(59)
Opioids and alcohol, Dependence on a      Schizoid disorder of childhood or ado-
    combination of substances excluding     lescence 60(61)
    179                                 Other disorders (of infancy, childhood,
Oppositional disorder (of childhood or      or adolescence) with physical mani-
    adolescence) 63(64)                     festations 78-86
Organic affective syndrome 117(118)       Functional encopresis 81(82)
                                          Functional enuresis 79(80)
Organic brain syndromes 103-124
                                          Sleep terror disorder (Pavor Noc-
  Affective 117(118)
                                            turnus) 84(86)
  Atypical or mixed 123(123)
                                          Sleepwalking disorder 82(84)
  Amnestic 112(113)
                                          Stuttering 78(79)
  Delirium 104(107)
  Dementia 107(111)                     Other, Interpersonal problem 334
  Intoxication 120(122)                   Life circumstance problem, Phase of
  Organic affective 117(118)                life problem or 333
  Organic delusional 114(115)             Mixed or unspecified substance abuse/
  Organic hallucinosis 115(116)             dependence 179
  Organic personality 118(119)            Or mixed organic brain syndrome
  Withdrawal 122(123)                       31(31)
Organic delusional syndrome 114(115)    Other or unspecified substance-induced
Organic hallucinosis 115(116)               organic mental disorders 161-162
Organic mental disorders 102-162          Affective / Amnestic / Atypical or
  Organic brain syndromes 103-124           mixed / Delirium / Delusional / De-
  Organic mental disorders—Section 1:       mentia / Hallucinosis/Intoxication /
    Dementias arising in the senium         Personality/Withdrawal 161-162
      and presenium 124-128             Other personality disorder, Atypical,
    Substance-induced 128-162               mixed or 329-330
Organic mental disorders—Section 2:     Other psychosexual disorders 281-283
  Affective / Amnestic / Atypical or      Ego-dystonic homosexuality 281(282)
    mixed /Delirium/Delusional /Demen-    Psychosexual disorder not elsewhere
    tia/Hallucinosis/Personality 162        classified 282-283
Organic mental disorders, substance-in- Other specific affective disorders 218-
    duced 128-162                           223
  Alcohol 129-139                       Other specified, family circumstances
  Amphetamine 147-150                       333
  Barbiturate 139-142                     Substance dependence 179
  Caffeine 160-161                      Overanxious disorder 55(56)
  Cannabis 156-159
  Cocaine 145-147
  Hallucinogen 153-156                  Panic disorder 230(231)
  Opioid 142-145                        Paranoia 197(197)
  Other 161-162                         Paranoid disorders 195(196)
  Phencyclidine (PCP) 150-153             Acute 197(197)
  Tobacco 159-160                         Atypical 198
Organic personality syndrome 118-         Paranoia 197(197)
    119                                   Shared paranoid disorder 197(197)
Orgasm, Inhibited female 279            Paranoid, personality disorder 307
  Inhibited male 280                        (309)


                                                                Index 491

  Type, Schizophrenic disorder 191        Delirium 152(153)
    (191)                                 Intoxication 151(151)
Paraphilias 266-275                       Mixed 153(153)
  Atypical 275                          Phobic disorders (phobic neuroses)
  Exhibitionism 272(272)                    225-230
  Fetishism 268(269)                      Agoraphobia with/without panic at-
  Pedophilia 271(271)                       tacks 226(227)
  Sexual masochism 273(274)               Simple phobia 228(229)
  Sexual sadism 274(275)                  Social phobia 227(228)
  Transvestism 269(270)                 Phobic neuroses. See Phobic disorders
  Voyeurism 272(273)                        225-230, Separation anxiety dis-
  Zoophilia 270(270)                        order 50(53)
Paraphrenia. See Paranoid disorder      Physical condition, Psychological factors
    195(196)                                affecting 303(303)
Parent-child problem 333                Physical disorders, (DSM term) 32
Passive-aggressive personality disorder   or conditions (Axis III) 26
    328(329)                            Pica 71(72)
Pathological gambling 291(292)          Pick's disease. See Primary degenerative
  Intoxication. See Alcohol idiosyncratic   dementia 124(126)
    intoxication 132(132)
                                        Post-concussional syndrome. See Atypi-
Pavor Nocturnus. See Sleep terror dis-      cal or mixed organic brain syndrome
    order 84(86)                            123(123)
Pedophilia 271(271)
                                        Post-traumatic stress disorder, Acute/
Personality disorder, Other or unspeci-     chronic or delayed 236(238)
    fied substance-induced 162
                                        Postpartum psychosis. See Schizophreni-
Personality disorders 305-330               form disorder 199(200), Brief re-
  Diagnosis in childhood or adolescence     active psychosis 200(201), Atypi-
    305                                     cal psychosis 202, Major affective
  Subtypes: Antisocial 317(320)             disorders 206(217), Organic brain
    Atypical, mixed or other 329-330        syndrome 103-124
    Avoidant 323(324)                   Premature ejaculation 280
    Borderline 321(322)                 Presenile dementia. See Primary degen-
    Compulsive 326(327)                     erative dementia, presenile onset
    Dependent 324(325)                      124(126)
    Histrionic 313(315)                 Primary degenerative dementia 124
    Narcissistic 315(317)                   (126)
    Paranoid 307(309)
                                          Presenile onset 124(126)
    Passive-aggressive 328(329)           Senile onset 124(126)
    Schizoid 309,310(311)
    Schizotypal 309, 312(312)           Profound mental retardation 39
                                        Pseudodementia. See Dementia 111,
Personality disorders, and psychotic dis-
                                            107(111), Major depressive episode
    orders 306
                                            212, 210(213)
  and specific developmental disorders
    (Axis II) 23                        Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia. See Schiz-
                                            otypal personality disorder 309,
Pervasive developmental disorders 86-       312(312)
    92
                                        Pseudopsychosis. See Factitious disorder
Phase of life problem or other life cir-    with psychological symptoms 286
    cumstance problem 333                   (287)
Phencyclidine (PCP) or similarly acting Psychogenic, amnesia 253(255)
    arylcyclohexylamine abuse 175(175)    fugue 255(257)
Phencyclidine (PCP) or similarly acting   pain disorder 247(249)
    arylcyclohexylamine-induced, organ- Psychological factors affecting physical
    ic mental disorders 150-153             condition 303(303)


492 Index

Psychophysiologic disorders. See Psycho- Schizoid, disorder of childhood or ado-
    logical factors affecting physical      lescence 60(61)
    condition 303(303)                    Personality disorder 309, 310(311)
Psychosexual disorder not elsewhere     Schizophrenic disorders 181(188)
    classified 282-283                    Catatonic type 190(191)
                                          Disorganized type 190(190)
Psychosexual disorders 261-283            Paranoid type 191(191)
  Gender identity disorders 261-266       Residual type 192(192)
  Paraphilias 266-275                     Undifferentiated type 191(192)
  Psychosexual dysfunctions 275-281
  Other psychosexual disorders 281-     Schizophreniform disorder 199(200)
    283                                 Schizotypal personality disorder 309,
                                            312(312)
Psychosexual dysfunctions 275-281
  Atypical 281                          School phobia. See Separation anxiety
  Functional dyspareunia 280                disorder 50(53)
  Functional vaginismus 280             Sedative. See Barbiturate
  Inhibited female orgasm 279           Senile dementia. See Primary degenera-
  Inhibited male orgasm 280                 tive dementia, senile onset 124
  Inhibited sexual desire 278               (126)
  Inhibited sexual excitement 279
                                        Separation anxiety disorder 50(53)
  Premature ejaculation 280
                                        Severe mental retardation 39
Psychosomatic. See Psychological factors
    affecting physical condition 303    Sexual desire/excitement, Inhibited
    (303)                                   278-279
Psychotic depressive reaction. See Ma-  Sexual, deviations. See Paraphilias 266-
    jor depression 218                      275
Psychotic disorders not elsewhere classi- Masochism 273(274)
    fied 199-203                          Sadism 274(275)
  Atypical psychosis 202                Shared paranoid disorder 197(197)
  Brief reactive psychosis 200(201)     Simple phobia 228(229)
  Schizoaffective disorder 202
                                        Simple schizophrenia. See Schizotypal
  Schizophreniform disorder 199(200)        personality disorder 309, 312(312)
Pyromania 294(295)
                                        Sleep terror disorder 84(86)
Reactive attachment disorder of infancy Sleepwalking disorder 82(84)
    57(59)                              Social phobia 227(228)
Reading disorder, Developmental 93      Socialized conduct disorder, Aggressive/
    (94)                                    Nonaggressive 45(49)
Receptive dysphasia. See Developmental  Sociopathic personality. See Antisocial
    language disorder, receptive type       personality disorder 317(320)
    96(97)                              Soft neurological signs. See Axis III 26
Receptive type, Developmental language  Somatization disorder 241(243)
  disorder 96(97)
                                        Somatoform disorders 241-252
Residual type, Schizophrenic disorder     Atypical 251-252
    192(192)                              Conversion disorder 244(247)
Retardation, Mental 36-41                 Hypochondriasis 249(251)
                                          Psychogenic pain disorder 247(249)
Rum fits (alcohol withdrawal seizures)    Somatization disorder 241(243)
    133, 134                            Somnambulism. See Sleepwalking dis-
Rumination disorder of infancy 72(73)       order 82(84)
                                        Specific developmental disorders (Axis
Sadism, Sexual 274(275)                      II) 92-99
Schizoaffective disorder 202              Articulation 98(98)


                                                                Index 493

  Atypical 99                             Tobacco dependence 176(178)
  Developmental arithmetic 94(95)         Unspecified substance dependence
  Developmental language:                   179
    Expressive type 95(96)              Substance-induced organic mental dis-
    Receptive type 96(97)                   orders 128-162
  Developmental reading 93(94)
  Mixed specific developmental 98       Symbiotic psychosis. See Pervasive de-
                                            velopmental disorders 86-87
Specific learning disturbance. See Spe-
                                        Sympathomimetic. See Amphetamine
    cific developmental disorders 92-
    99
                                        Tic disorder, Atypical 77
Speech disorders. See Developmental lan-
    guage disorder 95-97                  Chronic motor 75(75)
                                          Transient 74(75)
Stereotyped movement disorders 73-77      See also Tourette's disorder 76(77)
  Atypical 77
  Atypical tic disorder 77              Tobacco dependence 176(178)
  Chronic motor tic disorder 77         Tobacco, organic mental disorder 159-
  Tourette's disorder 76(77)                160
  Transient tic disorder 74(75)           Withdrawal 159(159)
Stress disorder, Post-traumatic 236     Tourette's disorder 76(77)
    (238)                               Transient situational disturbance. See
Stuttering 78(79)                           Adjustment disorder 299(300)
Subacute confusional state. See Delirium Transient tic disorder 74(75)
    104(107)
                                        Transsexualism 261(263)
Substance use disorders 163-179
  Abuse 164                             Transvestism 269(270)
  Classes of substances 165             Traumatic neurosis. See Post-traumatic
  Dependence 165                            stress disorder 236(238)
  Multiple substance use 166
  Tolerance 165                         Uncomplicated bereavement 333
  Withdrawal 165
                                        Undersocialized conduct disorder,
Substance use disorders (by substance):   Aggressive type 45(47)
  Alcohol abuse/dependence 169-170        Nonaggressive type 45(48)
  Amphetamine or similarly acting
    sympathomimetic abuse/dependence    Undifferentiated type, Schizophrenic
    173-174                                 Disorder 191(192)
  Barbiturate or similarly acting seda- Unspecified mental disorder (nonpsy-
    tive or hypnotic abuse/dependence       chotic) 335
    170-171
  Cannabis abuse/dependence 175-176     Unspecified substance dependence 179
  Cocaine abuse 173
  Hallucinogen abuse 175                V codes for conditions not attributable
  Opioid abuse/dependence 171-173           to a mental disorder that are a focus
  Opioid and other nonalcoholic sub-        of attention or treatment 331-334
    stances, Dependence on combina-       Academic problem/Adult antisocial
    tion of 179                             behavior / Borderline intellectual
  Other, mixed or unspecified substance     functioning/Childhood or adoles-
    abuse 179                               cent antisocial behavior/Malin-
  Other specified substance dependence      gering/Marital problem/Noncompli-
    179                                     ance with medical treatment/Occu-
  Phencyclidine (PCP) or similarly act-     pational problem/Other specified
    ing arylcyclohexylamine abuse 175       family circumstances/Parent-child
      (175)                                 problem/Phase of life problem or
  Substances excluding opioids and al-      other life circumstance problem/
    cohol, Dependence on combination        Uncomplicated bereavement 331-
    of 179                                  334


494 Index

Vaginismus, Functional 280 Withdrawal, Adjustment disorder with
Voyeurism 272(273) 302
                                          Organic mental disorders 122(123)
Wernicke's encephalopathy. See Alcohol Withdrawal delirium, Alcohol 134(135)
    amnestic syndrome 136(137) Barbiturate 141(141)
Withdrawal, Alcohol 133(133) Work (or academic) inhibition, Adjust-
  Barbiturate 140(141) ment disorder with 301
  Opioid 144(145)
  Tobacco 159(159) Zoophilia 270(270)



